The following is a conversation with Matthew Johnson, a professor of psychiatry and behavioral
science at Johns Hopkins, and is one of the top scientists in the world conducting seminal
research on psychedelics.
This was one of the most eye opening and fascinating conversations I've ever had on this podcast.
I'm sure I'll talk with Matt many more times.
Quick mention of a sponsor followed by some thoughts related to the episode.
Thank you to a new sponsor, Brave, a fast browser that feels like Chrome but has more
privacy preserving features.
Neuro, the maker of functional sugar free gum and mints that I use to give my brain
a quick caffeine boost.
Forcigmatic, the maker of delicious mushroom coffee, I'm just now realizing how ironic
the set of sponsors are, and Cash App, the app I use to send money to friends.
Please check out these sponsors in the description to get a discount and to support this podcast.
As a side note, let me say that psychedelics is an area of study that is fascinating to
me, in that it gives hints that much of the magic of our experience arises from just a
few chemical interactions in the brain, and that the nature of that experience can be
expanded through the tools of biology, chemistry, physics, neuroscience, and artificial intelligence.
The fact that a world class scientist and researcher like Matt can apply rigor to our
study of this mysterious and fascinating topic is exciting to me beyond words.
As is the case with any of my colleagues who dare to venture out into the darkness of all
that is unknown about the human mind, with both an openness of first principle thinking
and the rigor of the scientific method.
If you enjoy these things, subscribe on YouTube, review it with 5 stars on Apple Podcast,
follow on Spotify, support on Patreon, or connect with me on Twitter at Lex Freedman.
And now, here's my conversation with Matthew Johnson.
Can you give an introduction to psychedelics, like a whirlwind overview?
Maybe what are psychedelics and what are the kinds of psychedelics out there and in whatever
way you find meaningful to categorize.
Yeah, you can categorize them by their chemical structure.
So phenethylamines, tryptamines, ergalines, that is less of a meaningful way to classify
them.
I think that their pharmacological activity, their receptor activity is the best way.
Well, let me start even broader than that because there I'm talking about the classic
psychedelics.
Broadly speaking, when we say psychedelic, that refers to, for most people, a broad number
of compounds that work in different pharmacological ways.
So it includes the so called classic psychedelics.
That includes psilocybin and solosin, which are in mushrooms, LSD, dimethyl tryptamine
or DMT, it's an ayahuasca, people can smoke it too, mescaline, which is in peyote and
sanpatero cactus.
And those all work by hitting a certain subtype of serotonin receptor, the serotonin 2A receptor.
They act as agonists at that receptor.
Other compounds like PCP, ketamine, MDMA, ibogaine, they all are more broadly speaking called
psychedelics, but they work by very different ways pharmacologically.
And they have some different effects, including subjective effects, even though there's enough
of an overlap in the subjective effects that people informally refer to them as psychedelic.
And I think what that overlap is, compared to say caffeine and cocaine and Ambien, etc.,
other psychoactive drugs, is that they have strong effects in altering one's sense of
reality and including the sense of self.
And I should throw in there that cannabis, more historically like in the 70s, has been
called a minor psychedelic.
And I think with that latter definition, it does fit that definition, particularly if
one doesn't have a tolerance.
So you mentioned serotonin, so most of the effect comes from something around the chemistry
around neurotransmitters and so on.
So it's chemical interactions in the brain, or is there other kinds of interactions that
have this kind of perception and self awareness altering effects?
Well, as far as we know, all of the psychedelics of all the different classes we've talked
about, their major activity is caused by receptor level events.
So either acting at the post receptor side of the synapse, in other words, neurotransmission
operates by one neuron releasing neurotransmitter into a synapse, a gap between the two neurons.
And then the other neuron receives, it has receptors that receives, and then there can
be an activation caused by that.
So it's like a pitcher and a catcher.
So all of the major psychedelics work by either mimicking a pitcher or a catcher.
So for example, the classic psychedelics, they fit into the same catcher's mitt on
the post synaptic receptor side as serotonin itself.
But they do a slightly different thing to the cell, to the neuron than serotonin does.
There's a different signaling pathway after that initial activation.
Something like MDMA works at the presynaptic side, the pitcher side, and basically it floods
the synapse or the gap between the cells with a bunch of serotonin, the natural neurotransmitter.
So it's like the pitcher in a baseball game all of a sudden just starts throwing balls
like every second.
Everything we're talking about is it often more natural, meaning found in the natural
world?
You mentioned cacti, cactus, or is it chemically manufactured artificially in the lab?
So the classic psychedelics, there's...
What are the classics?
Using terminology that's not chemical terminology, not like the terminology you see in titles
of papers, academic papers, but more common parlance.
It would be good to define their effects, like how they're different.
And so it includes LSD, psilocybin, which is in mushrooms, mescaline, DMT.
Which one is mescaline?
One is in the different cacti, so the one most people will know is peyote, but it also
shows up in San Pedro or Peruvian torch.
And all of these classic psychedelics, at the right dose, and typically, they have very
strong effects on one sense of reality and one sense of self.
What some of the things that make them different than other, more broadly speaking psychedelics
like MDMA and others, is that there, at least the major examples, there are some exotic
ones that differ, but the ones I've talked about are extremely safe at the physiological
level.
Like LSD and psilocybin, there's no known lethal overdose.
Unless you have really severe heart disease, because it modestly raises your blood pressure,
so the same person might be hurt, troubling snow or going up the stairs, that could have
a cardiac event, because they've taken one of these drugs.
But for most people, someone could take 1,000 times what the effect of dose is, and it's
not going to cause any organ damage, affect the brainstem, make them stop breathing.
So in that sense, they're freakishly safe at the physio...
I would never call any compounds safe, because there's always a risk.
They're freakishly safe at the physiological level.
I mean, you can hardly find anything over the counter like that.
I mean, aspirin's not like that, caffeine is not like that.
Most drugs, you take 5, 10, 20, maybe it takes 100, but you get to some times the effect
of dose, and it's going to kill you or cause some serious damage.
And so that's something that's a remark about most of these classic psychedelics.
That's incredible, by the way, that you can go on a hell of a journey in the mind, like
probably transformative, potentially in a deeply transformative way, and yet there's
no dose that in most people would have a lethal effect.
That's kind of fascinating.
There's this duality between the mind and the body.
It's like...
Okay, sorry if I bring him up way too much, but David Goggins is like, you know, the kind
of things you go on a long run, like the hell you might go through in your mind.
Your mind can take a lot, and you can go through a lot with the mind, and the body will just
be its own thing.
You can go through hell, but after a good night's sleep, be back to normal, and the body is always
there.
So bringing it back to Goggins, it's like you can do that without even destroying your
knee or whatever.
Right, yes.
Or coming close and riding that line.
That's true.
So the unfortunate thing about the running, which he uses running to test the mind, so
the aspect of running that is negative, in order to test the mind, you really have to
push the body, like take the body through a journey.
I wish there was another way of doing that in the physical exercise space.
I think there are exercises that are easier on the body than others, but running sure
is a hell of an effective way to do it.
And one of the ways that where it differs is that you're unlike exercise, you're essentially...
This exercise, to really get to those intense levels, you really need to be persistent about
it.
I mean, it'll be intense if you're really out of shape, just jogging for five minutes.
But to really get to those intense levels, you need to have the dedication.
And so some of the other ways of altering subjective effects or states of consciousness
take that type of dedication, psychedelics though, I mean, someone takes the right dose.
They're strapped into the roller coaster, and something interesting is going to happen.
And I really like what you said about that distinction between the mind or the contrast
between the mind effects and the body effects, because I think of this, I do research with
all the drugs, caffeine, alcohol, methamphetamine, cocaine, alcohol, legal, illegal.
Most of these drugs, thinking about, say, cocaine and methamphetamine, you can't give
to a regular user, you can't safely give a dose where the regular cocaine user is going
to say, oh man, that's the strongest coke I've ever had, because you get it past the
ethics committee and you need approval, and I wouldn't want to give someone something
that's dangerous.
To go to those levels where they would say that, you would have to give something that's
physiologically riskier.
psilocybin or LSD, you can give a dose at the physiological level that is a very good
chance it's going to be the most intense psychological experience of that person's life and have
zero chance for most people if you screen them of killing them.
The big risk is behavioral toxicity, which is a fancy way of saying doing something stupid.
I mean, you're really intoxicated, like if you wander into traffic or you fall from
a height, just like plenty of people do on high doses of alcohol, and the other kind
of unique thing about classic psychedelics is that they're not addictive, which is pretty
much unheard of when it comes to so called drugs of abuse or drugs that people, at least
at some frequency, choose to take most of what we think of as drugs, caffeine, alcohol,
cocaine, cannabis.
Most of these you can get into alcohol, you can get into a daily use pattern, and that's
just so unheard of with psychedelics.
Most people have taken these things on a daily basis, it's more like they're building up
the courage to do it, and then they build up a tolerance, they're in college and they
do it on a day, or can you take acid seven days in a row, and that type of thing, rather
than a self control issue, where you have and say, oh God, I got to stop taking this,
I got to stop drinking every night, I got to cut down on the coke, whatever.
So that's the classic psychedelics.
What are the, what's the good term, modern psychedelics, or more maybe psychedelics that
are created in the lab?
What else is there?
Right, so MDMA is the big one, and I should say that with the classic psychedelics that
LSD is sort of, you can call it a semi synthetic, because there's natural from both ergot and
in certain seeds, morning glory seeds as one example, there are some very close chemical
relatives of LSD, so LSD is close to what occurs in nature, but not quite it.
But then when we get into the other non classic psychedelics, probably the most prominent
one is MDMA, people call it ecstasy, people call it molly, and it is, it differs from
classic psychedelics in a number of ways.
It can be addictive, but not so, it's like, you can have cocaine on this end of the continuum
and classic psychedelics here.
Continuum of addiction.
So it's certainly no cocaine, it's pretty rare for people to get into daily use patterns,
but it's possible, and they can get into more like, using once a week pattern, where they
can find it hard to stop, but it's somewhere in between mostly towards the classic psychedelic
side in terms of relatively little addiction potential.
But it's also more physiologically dangerous.
I think that the, certainly the therapeutic use, it's showing really promising effects
for treating PTSD and the models that are used, I think those are extremely acceptable
when it comes to the risk benefit ratio that you see all throughout medicine.
But nonetheless, we do know that at a certain dose and a certain frequency that MDMA can
cause long term damage to the serotonin system in the brain, so it doesn't have that level
of kind of freakish bodily safety that the classic psychedelics do.
And it has more of a heart load, a cardiovascular, I don't mean kind of emotion, I mean, in
this sense, although it is very emotional and that's something unique about its subjective
effects, but it's more of a presser.
And the terminology used instead of like a freakish capacity, allowing you from a researcher
perspective, but a personal perspective too of taking a journey with some of these psychedelics
that is the heroic dose as they say.
So like these are tools that allow you to take a serious mental journey, whatever that
is.
That's what you mean.
And with MDMA, there's a little bit, it starts entering this territory where you got to be
careful about the risks to the body potentially.
So yes, that in the sense that you can't kind of push the dose up as high as you safely
as one can, if they're in the right setting, like in our research, as they can with the
classic psychedelics, but probably more importantly, just the nature of the effects with MDMA aren't
the full on psychedelic.
It's not the full journey.
So it's sort of a psychedelic with rose colored glasses on, a psychedelic that's been called
more of a heart trip than a head trip.
The nature of reality doesn't unravel as frequently as it does with classic psychedelics.
But you're able to more directly sense your environment.
So your perception system still works.
It's not completely detached from reality with MDMA.
That's true, relatively speaking.
That said, at most doses of classic psychedelics, you still have a tether to reality.
Changes a little bit when you're talking about smoking DMT or smoking five methoxy DMT,
which are some interesting examples we could talk more about.
But with MDMA, for example, it's very rare to have what's called an ego loss experience
or a sense of transcendental unity, where one really seemingly loses the psychological
construct of the self.
But MDMA, it's very common for people to have this, they still are perceiving themselves
as a self, but it's common for them to have this warmth, this empathy for humanity and
for their friends and loved ones.
So it's more, and you see those effects under the classic psychedelics, but that's a subset
of what the classic psychedelics do.
So I see MDMA in terms of its subjective effects is if you think about Venn diagrams, it's sort
of MDMA is all within the classic psychedelics.
So everything that you see on a particular MDMA session, sometimes a psilocybin session
looks just like that.
But then sometimes it's completely different with psilocybin, it's a little more narrowed
in terms of the variability with MDMA.
Is there something general to say about what the psychedelics do to the human mind?
You mentioned kind of an ego loss experience in the space of Venn diagrams.
If we were to draw a big circle, what can we say about that big circle?
In terms of people's report of subjective experience, probably one of the most general
things we can say is that it expands that range.
So many people come out of these sessions saying that they didn't know it was possible
to have an experience like that.
So there's an emphasis on the subjective experience.
Is there words that people put to it that capture that experience or is it something
that just has to be experienced?
As a researcher, that's an interesting question because you have to kind of measure the effects
of this.
And how do you convert that into numbers?
That's the ultimate challenge.
Is that possible to one, convert it into words and the second, convert the words into
numbers somehow?
So we do a lot of that with questionnaires, some of which are very psychometrically validated.
So lots of numbers have been crunched on them.
And there's always a limitation with questionnaires.
I mean, subjective effects are subjective effects.
Ultimately, it's what the person is reporting.
That doesn't necessarily point towards a ground truth.
So for example, if someone says that they felt like they touched another dimension or
they felt like they sensed the reality of God or if they, I mean, just you name it,
people's ontological views can sometimes shift.
I think that's more about where they're coming from and I don't think it's the quintessential
way in which they work.
There's plenty of people that hold onto a completely naturalistic viewpoint and have
profound and helpful experiences with these compounds.
But the subjective effects can be so broad that for some people, it shifts their philosophical
viewpoint more towards idealism, more towards thinking of that the nature of reality might
be more about consciousness than about material.
That's a domain I'm very interested in.
Right now, we have essentially zero to say about that in terms of validating those types
of claims, but it's even interesting just to see what people say along those lines.
So you're interested in saying, like, can we more rigorously study this process of expansion?
Like, what do we mean by this expansion of your sense of what is possible in the experiences
in this world?
Right.
As much as what we can say about that through naturalistic psychology, especially as much
as we can root it to solid psychological constructs and solid neuroscientific constructs.
And I wonder what the impact is of the language that you bring to the table.
So you mentioned about God or, speaking of God, a lot of people are really into sort
of theoretical physics these days at a very surface level and you can bring the language
of physics.
Right.
You can talk about quantum mechanics.
You can talk about general relativity and curvature of space time and using just that
language without a deep technical understanding of it to somehow start thinking like sort
of visualizing atoms in your head and somehow through that process, because you have the
language using that language to kind of dissolve the ego, like realize that we're just all
little bits of physical objects that behave in mysterious ways.
And so that has to do with the language.
Like if you read a Sean Carroll book or something recently, it seems like as a huge influence
on the way you might experience, might perceive the world and might experience the alteration
that psychedelics brings to the, to the your perception system.
So I wonder like the language you bring to the table, how that affects the journey you
go on with the psychedelics.
I think very much so.
And I think there's, I'm a little concerned, some of the science is going a little too
far in the direction of, around the edges, speaking about it, changing beliefs in this
sense or that sense about particular, in particular domains.
And I think what really what a lot of what's going on is what you just discussed, it's
the priors coming into, into it.
So if you're been reading a lot of, you know, physics, then you might, you know, bring
up, you know, like, you know, space time and interpret the experience in that sense.
I mean, it's not uncommon for people come out talking about visions of the, it's not
the most typical thing, but it's come up in sessions, I've, I've guided the Big Bang
and the, you know, this sort of nature of reality.
I think probably the best way to think about these experiences is that, and the best evidence,
even though we're in our infancy and understanding it, that they really tap into more general
psychological mechanisms.
I think one of the best arguments is they, they, they, they reduce the influence of the,
of our priors of what we bring into the, all of the assumptions that we all that, you know,
were essentially, especially as adults were riding on top of heuristic after heuristic
to get through life.
And you need to do that.
And that's a good thing.
And that's extremely efficient and evolution has shaped that, but that comes at an expense.
And it seems that these experiences will, will allow someone greater mental flexibility
and openness.
And so one can be both less influenced by their, their prior assumptions, but still nonetheless,
the nature of the experience can be influenced by what they've been exposed to in the world.
And sometimes they can get it at a deeper, in a deeper way.
Like maybe they've read, I mean, I had a philosophy professor at one time as a, as a participant
in a high dose psilocybin study.
And he's like, I remember him saying, my God, it's like Hagel's opposites defining each
other.
I get it.
I've taught this thing for, you know, years and years and years, like I get it now.
And so like that, you know, and, and even at the psychological emotional level, like
the cancer patients we worked with, you know, they told themselves a million times over
the people trying to quit smoking.
I need to quit smoking.
Oh, I'm ruining my life with this cancer.
I'm still healthy.
I should be getting out.
I'm letting this thing defeat me.
It's like, yeah, you told yourself that in your head, but sometimes they had these experiences
and they kind of feel it in their heart.
Like they really get it.
So in some sense that you bring some prize to the table, but psychedelics allow you to
acknowledge them and then throw them away.
So like one popular terminology around this in the engineering space is first principles
thinking that Elon Musk, for example, espouses a lot.
Let me ask a fun question before we return to a more serious discussion.
But Elon Musk as an example, but it could be just engineers in general.
Do you think there's a use for psychedelics to take a journey of rigorous first principles
thinking?
So like throwing away, we're not talking about throwing away assumptions about the nature
of reality in terms of like our philosophy of the way we live day to day life, but we're
talking about like how to build a better rocket or how to build a better car or how to build
a better social network or all those kinds of things, engineering questions.
I absolutely think there's huge potential there.
And there was some research in the late 60s, early 70s that was very early and not very
rigorous in terms of methodology, but it was consistent with the, I mean, there's just
countless anecdotes of folks, I mean, people have argued that just Silicon Valley was largely
influenced by psychedelic experience.
I remember the, I think the person that came up with the concept of freeware or shareware,
it's like it kind of was generated out of or influenced by psychedelic experience.
So to this, I think there's incredible potential there and we know really next, there's no
rigorous research on that, but is there anecdotal stuff like with Steve Jobs?
I think there's stories, right?
In your exploration of the, is there something a little bit more than just stories?
Is there like a little bit more of a solid data points?
Even if they're just experiential like anecdotes, is there something that you draw inspiration
from like in your intuition?
Because we'll talk about you're trying to construct studies that are more rigorous around
these questions.
But is there something you draw inspiration from from the past from the 80s and the 90s
and Silicon Valley, that kind of space?
Or is it just like you have a sense based on everything you've learned and these kind
of loose stories that there's something worth digging at?
I am influenced by the, gosh, the just incredible number of anecdotes surrounding these.
I mean, Kerry Mullis, he invented PCR, I mean, absolutely revolutionized biological sciences.
He says he wouldn't have won the Nobel Prize from it, said he wouldn't have come up with
that had he not had psychedelic experiences.
You know, now he's an interesting character.
People should read his autobiography because you could point to other things he was into.
But I think that speaks to the casting your nets wide and this mental flex.
Or these general mechanisms where sometimes if you cast your nets really wide and it's
going to depend on the person and their influences, but sometimes you come up with false positives.
You connect the dots where maybe you shouldn't have connected those dots.
But I think that can be constrained and so much of our, not only a personal psychological
suffering, but our limitations academically and in terms of technology are because of
the self imposed limitations and heuristics, these entrance ways of thinking, like those
examples throughout the history of science where someone has come up with the paradigm
ships.
It's like, here's something completely different.
This doesn't make sense by any of the previous models and we need more of those and then
you need the right balance between that because so many of the novel crazy ideas are just
bunk and that's what science is about separating them from the valid paradigm shifting ideas.
But we need more paradigm shifting ideas in a big way.
And I think you could argue that we've, because of the structure of academia and science in
modern times, it heavily biases against those.
Right.
There's all kinds of mechanisms in our human nature that resist paradigm shift quite sort
of obviously.
And psychedelics, there could be a lot of other tools, but it seems like psychedelics
could be one set of tools that encourage paradigm shifting thinking.
So like the first principle is kind of thinking.
So it's a kind of, you're at the forefront of research here.
There's just kind of anecdotal stories.
There's early studies.
There's a sense that we don't understand very much, but there's a lot of depth here.
How do we get from there to where Elon and I can regularly, like I wake up every morning,
I have deep work sessions where it's well understood, like what dose to take.
Like if I want to explore something where it's all legal, where it's all understood
and safe, all that kind of stuff, how do we get from where we are today to there?
Not speaking in terms of legality in the sense like policymaking, all that like laws
and stuff, meaning like how do we scientifically understand this stuff well enough to get to
a place where I can just take it safely in order to expand my thinking, like this kind
of first principles thinking, which I mean, my personal life currently doing, like how
do I have revolutionized particular several things?
Like it seems like the only tools I have right now, it's just just, but my mind going, doing
the first principles like, wait, wait, wait, okay.
Why has this been done this way?
Can we do it completely differently?
It seems like I'm still tethered to the priors that I bring to the table and I keep trying
to untether myself.
Maybe there's tools that can systematically help me untether.
Yeah, well, we need experiments and that's tied to the policy level stuff and I should
be clear, I would never encourage anyone to do anything illicitly, but yeah, in the future,
we could see these compounds used for technical and scientific innovation.
What we need are studies that are digging into that right now, most of what the funding,
which is largely from philanthropy, not from the government, largely what it's for is treatment
of mental disorders like addiction and depression, et cetera, but we need studies.
One of the early initial stabs on this question decades ago was they took some architects
and engineers and said, what problems have you been working on?
Very you've been stuck for months like working on this damn thing and you're not getting
anywhere like your head's butting up against the wall.
Come in here, take, and I think it was 100 micrograms of LSD, so not a big session and
a little bit different model where they were actually working, it was a moderate enough
dose where they could work on the problem during the session.
I think probably, I'm an empiricist so I'd like to see all the studies done, but the
first thing I would do is a really high dose session where you're not necessarily in front
of your computer, which you can't really do on a really high dose.
And then the work has been talked about, you take a really high dose, you take a journey
and then the breakthroughs come from when you return from the journey and integrate quote
unquote that experience.
I think that's where all the head, and again, we're babies at this point, but my gut tells
me that it's the so called integration, the aftermath.
We know that there's some different forms of neuroplasticity that are unfolding in the
days following a psychedelics, at least in animals.
Probably going on humans, we don't know if that's related to the therapeutic effects.
My gut tells me it is, although it's only part of the story, but we need big studies
where we compare people, like let's get 100 people like that, scientists that are working
on a problem, and then randomize them too.
And then I think you need a even more credible active controls or active placebo conditions
to kind of tease this out.
And then also in conjunction with that, and you can do this in the same study, you want
to combine that with more rigorous sort of experimental models where we actually get
there are problem solving tasks that we know, for example, that you tend to do better on
after you've gotten a good night's sleep versus not.
And my sense is there's a relationship there.
People go back to first principles, questioning those first principles they're operating under,
and getting away from their priors in terms of creative problem solving.
And so I think you wrap those things, and you could speak a little more rigorously about
those.
Because ultimately, if everyone's bringing their own problem, that's more in the face
of outside, but you can't dig in as much and get as much experimental power and speak to
the mechanisms as you can with having everyone do the same sort of canned problem solving
task.
So we've been speaking about psychedelics generally.
Is there one you find from the scientific perspective or maybe even philosophical perspective
most fascinating to study?
Therapeutically, I'm most interested in psilocybin and LSD, and I think we need to do a lot more
with LSD because it's mainly been psilocybin in the modern era.
I've recently gotten a grant from the Hefter Research Institute to do an LSD study, so
I haven't started it yet, but I'm going through the paperwork and everything.
Therapeutic meaning there's some issue and you're trying to treat that issue.
In terms of just what's the most fascinating, understanding the nature of these experiences,
if you really want to wrap your head around what's going on when someone has a completely
altered sense of reality and sense of self, there I think you're talking about the high
dose, either smoked vaporized or intravenous injection, which all kind of, they're very
similar pharmacologically, of DMT and five methoxy DMT.
This is like when people, this is what, I don't know if you're familiar with Terence
McKinnon, he would talk a lot about smoking DMT, Joe Rogan has talked a lot about that.
People will say that, and there's a close relative called five methoxy DMT.
Most people who know the terrain will say that's an order of magnitude or orders of
magnitude beyond anything one could get from even a high dose of psilocybin or LSD.
I think it's a question about whether, how therapeutic, I think there is a therapeutic
potential there, but it's probably not as sure of a bet because one goes so far out,
it's almost like they're not contemplating their relationship in their direction in life.
They are like, reality is ripping apart at the seams and the very nature of the self
and of the sense of reality.
The amazing thing about these compounds, and same to a less degree with oral psilocybin
and LSD is that unlike some other drugs that really throw you far out there, anesthetics.
Even alcohol, as reality starts to become different at higher and higher doses, there's
this numbing, there's this ability for the sense of being the center, having a conscious
experience that's memorable, that is maintained throughout these classic psychedelic experiences.
One can go as far, so far out while still being aware of the experience and remembering
the experience.
Interesting, so being able to carry something back.
Can you dig in a little deeper?
What is DMT?
How long is the trip usually?
How much do we understand about it?
Is there something interesting to say about the nature of the experience and what we understand
about it?
One of the common methods for people to use it is to smoke it or vaporize it.
This is a pretty good kind of description of what it might feel like on the ground.
The caveat is it's a completely insufficient description and someone's going to be listening.
It's like nothing you could say is going to come close, but it'll take about three big
hits, inhalations, in order to have what people call a breakthrough dose.
There's no great definition of that, but basically meaning moving away from not just having the
typical psilocybin or LSD experience where things are radically different, but you're
still basically a person in this reality to go in somewhere else.
That'll typically take three hits.
This stuff comes on like a freight train.
One takes a hit and around the time of the first exhalation, we're talking about a few
seconds in, or maybe just sometime between the first and the second hit, it'll start
to come on.
They're already up to, say, what they might get from a 30 milligram or 300 microgram LSD
trip, a big trip.
They're already there at the second hit, but they're going, their consciousness is gear.
This is like acceleration, not speed to speak of physics.
Those receptors are getting filled like that and they're going from zero to 60 in like
Tesla time.
At the second hit, again, they're at maybe the strongest psychedelic experience they've
ever had.
If they can take that third hit, even some people can't, they're propelled into this
other reality.
The nature of that other reality will differ depending on who you ask, but folks will often
talk about, and we've done some survey research on this, entities of different types, elves
tend to pop up.
The caveat is, I strongly presume all of this is culturally influenced, but thinking more
about the psychology and the neuroscience, there is probably something fundamental.
For someone that might be colored as elves, others that might be colored as, Terrence McKinnon
called himself dribbling basketballs.
For someone else, it might be little animals or someone else, it might be aliens.
I think that probably is dependent on who they are and what they've been exposed to,
but just the fact that one has this sense that they're surrounded by autonomous entities.
Intelligent autonomous entities.
People come back with stories that are just astonishing.
There's communication between these entities and often they're telling them things that
the person says are self validating, but it seems like it's impossible.
It really seems like, and again, this is what people say oftentimes, that it really is downloading
some intelligence from higher dimension or whatever metaphor you want to use.
These things come up in dreams where it's like someone is exposed to something that
I've had this in a dream, where it seems like what they are being exposed to is physically
impossible, but yet at the same time, self validating, it seems true that they really
are figuring something out.
Of course, the challenge is to say something in concrete terms after the experience where
you could verify that in any way, and I'm not familiar of any examples of that.
There's a sense in which I suppose the experience is like you're a limited cognitive creature
that knows very little about the world, and here's a chance to communicate with much wiser
entities that in a way that you can't possibly understand, are trying to give you hints of
deeper truths, and so there's that kind of sense that you can take something back, but
you can't, where our cognition is not capable to fully grasp the truth, we'll just get a
kind of sense of it, and somehow that process is mind expanding, that there's a greater
truth out there, that seems like what, from the people I've heard talk about, that seems
to be what it is, and that's so fascinating that there's fundamentally to this whole thing
is the communication between an entity that is other than yourself, entities, so it's
not just like a visual experience, like you're like floating through the world, is there's
other beings there, which is kind of, I don't know, I don't know what to sort of, from a
person who likes Freud and Carl Jung, I don't know what to think about that.
That being, of course, from one perspective is just you looking in the mirror, but it
could also be from another perspective, like actually talking to other beings.
Yeah, you mentioned Jung, and I think that's, he's particularly interesting, and it kind
of points to something I was thinking about saying is that I think what might be going
on from a naturalistic perspective, so regardless, whether or not there are, it doesn't depend
on autonomous entities out there, what might be happening is that just the associative
net, the level of learning, the comprehension might be so beyond what someone is used to
that the only way for the nervous system, for the aware sense of self to orient towards
it is all by metaphor.
And so I do think when we get into these realms as a strong empiricist, I think we always
got to be careful and be as grounded as possible, but I'm also willing to speculate and sort
of cast them that's wide with caveat.
But I think of things like archetypes, and it's plausible that there are certain stories,
we've gone through millions of years of evolution, it may be that we have certain characters
and stories that are central nervous system is sort of wired to tend to
Yeah, those stories, we carry those stories in us, and this unlocks them in a certain
kind of way.
And we think about stories, like our sense of self is basically narrative self is a story.
And we think about the world of stories, this is why metaphors are always more powerful
than sort of laying out all the details all the time, speaking in parables, it's like
if you really get something
This is why as much as I hate it, if you're presenting to Congress or something and you
have all the best data in the world, it's not as powerful as that one anecdote as the
mom dying of cancer that had the psilocybin session and it transformed her life, that's
a story that's meaningful.
And so when this kind of unimaginable kind of change and experience happens with DMT
ingestion, these stories of entities, they might be that, stories that are constructed
that is the closest, which is not to say the stories aren't real, I mean, I think we're
getting to layers where it doesn't really, right, yeah, yeah, but it's the closest
we can come to making sense out of it because what we do know about these psychedelics,
one of the levels beyond the receptor is that the brain is communicating it with itself
in a massively different way.
There's massive communication with areas that don't normally communicate.
And so I think that comes with both, it's casting the nets wide.
I think that comes with the insights and helpful novel ways of thinking, I do think it comes
with false positives, that could be some of the delusion.
And so when you're so far out there, like with DMT experience, like maybe alien is the
best way that the mind can wrap some arms around that.
So I don't know how much you're familiar with Joe Rogan, but he does bring up DMT quite
a bit.
It's almost a meme.
It is a meme.
Right.
Have you ever, what is it, have you ever tried DMT?
I mean, I think he talks about this experience of having met other entities and they were
mocking him, I think.
If I remember the experience correctly, like laughing at him and saying FU, FU or something
like that.
I may be misremembering this, but there's a general mockery.
And what he learned from that experience is that he shouldn't take himself too seriously.
So it's the dissolution of the ego and so on.
What do you think about that experience and maybe if you have more general things about
the Joe's infatuation with DMT and if DMT has that important role to play in popular
culture in general?
I'm definitely familiar with it.
I remember telling you offline that when I first, the first time I learned who Joe Rogan
was, it's probably 15 years ago and I came upon a clip and I realized there's another
person in the world who's into both DMT and Brazilian Jiu Jitsu and I think both those
worlds have grown dramatically since and it's probably not such a special club these days.
So he definitely got onto my radar screen quickly.
You weren't to both before was cool.
Right.
I mean, it's all relative because there's people that were before the late 90s and early
2000s who were into it to say, you're a Johnny come lately.
But yeah, compared to where we're at now.
But yet one of the things I always found fascinating by Joe's telling of his experiences I think
is that they resemble very much Terrence McKenna's experiences with DMT and Joe has talked very
much about Terrence McKenna and his experiences.
If I had to guess, I would guess that probably just having heard Terrence McKenna talk about
his experiences that influenced the coloring of Joe's experience.
It's funny how that works because I mean, that's why McKenna has poets and great orders
give us the words to then start to describe our experiences because our words are limited,
our language is limited and it's always nice to get some kind of nice poetry into the mix
to allow us to put words to it.
But I also see some elements that seem to relate to Joe's psychology, just from what
I've seen from hours of watching him on his podcast is that he's a self critical guy.
And I think with always his positive been, I'm always struck being a behavioral pharmacologist
and no one else really says it about cannabis.
I'll get back to the DMT thing about he likes the paranoid side of things.
He's like, that's you radically examining yourself.
It's like that's not just a bad thing, that's you need to look hard at yourself and something's
making you uncomfortable, dig into that and it's sort of along the lines of Goggins with
exercise and it's like, yeah, things, learning experiences aren't supposed to be easy.
Take advantage of these uncomfortable experience.
It's why we call in our research in a safe context, psychedelics, they're not bad trips,
they're challenging experiences.
Yes, so yeah, it's fascinating just that's a tiny tangent.
It's always cool for me to hear him talk about marijuana like weed as the paranoia, the
anxiety or whatever that the experience as actually the fuel for the experience.
Like I think he talks about smoking weed when he's writing.
That's inspiring to me because then you can't possibly have a bad experience.
I'm a huge fan of that, every experience is good.
Right, which is very Goggins.
Yeah, it's very Goggins.
Is it bad?
Okay.
All right.
Great.
Well, see Goggins is one side of that.
He wants it bad.
He wants the experience to be challenging always, but I mean, both are good.
The few times I've taken mushrooms, the experience was like everything was beautiful.
There's zero challenging aspect to it.
It was just like the world is beautiful and it gave me this deep appreciation of the world.
I would say, so like that's amazing, but also ones that challenge you are also amazing,
like all the time to drink vodka, but that's another lesson.
So back to DMT.
Yeah.
Joe's treating cannabis as a psychedelic, which is something that I'd say like a lot
of people treat it more like Xanax or like beer or vodka, but he's really trying to
delve into those, it's been called a minor psychedelic.
So with DMT, as you brought up, it's like the entity's mocking him and it's like you're
not good.
I mean, this reminds me of him describing his writing his or just his entire method
of comedy.
It's like watch the tape of yourself, don't just ignore it.
That's where I screwed up.
That's where I need to do better, this sort of radical self examination, which I think
our society is kind of getting away from because all the children win trophies type
of thing.
And it's like, no, don't go overboard, but recognize when you've messed up.
And so that's a big part of the psychedelic experience.
People come out sometimes saying, my God, I need to say sorry to my mom.
But it's so obvious or whatever interpersonal issue or my God, I'm not pulling enough weight
around the house and helping my wife.
And these things that are just obvious to them, the self criticism that can be a very
positive thing if you act on it.
You've mentioned addiction, maybe we could take a little bit detour into a darker aspect
of things.
Or not even darker, it's just an important aspect of things.
What's the nature of addiction?
You've mentioned some things within the big umbrella of psychedelics, maybe usually not
addictive, but maybe MDMA, I think you said might have some addictive properties.
But the point is stuff outside of the psychedelics umbrella can often be highly addictive.
So you've studied addiction from several angles.
One of which is behavioral economics.
What have you understood about addiction?
What is addiction from the biological, physiological level to the psychological to whatever is the
interesting way to talk about addiction?
Yeah.
And the lenses that I view addiction through very much are behavioral economic.
But I also think they converge on, I think it's beautiful at the other end of the spectrum,
sort of just a completely humanistic psychology perspective.
And it converges on what people come out of 12 step meetings talking about.
Can you say what is behavioral economics and what is humanistic psychology?
What do you mean by that?
And more importantly, behavioral economics lens.
What is that?
Yeah.
So behavioral economics, my definition of it is the application of economic principles,
mostly microeconomic principles.
So understanding the behavior of individual agents surrounding commodities in the marketplace,
applying microeconomic types of analyses to non economic behavior.
So basically at one point, psychologists figured out that there's this whole other discipline
that's been studying behavior.
It just happened to be all focused on monetary behavior, spending and saving money, et cetera.
But it comes with all of these principles that can be wildly and fruitfully applied to
understanding behavior.
So for example, I've studied things like demand curve analysis of drug consumption.
So I look at, for example, the tobacco cigarettes and nicotine products through the lens of
demand curves and in other words, at different prices, if there's different work requirements
for being able to smoke cigarettes, sort of modeling price.
Within that price data, there is some indication of addiction.
How much you, the habits that you form around these particular drugs?
It's one important dimension.
So I think a particularly important one there is elasticity or inelasticity, two ends of
the spectrum.
So that's the price sensitivity.
So for example, you could have something that's pretty price inelastic like gasoline.
So the price of gas at times can keep going up and Americans are just going to pretty
much buy the same amount of gas or maybe the price of gas doubles, but their consumption
only decreases by 10%.
So it's a sub proportional reduction.
So that's an inelastic.
And that changes, like you push the price up high enough, I mean, if it was $100 a gallon,
it would eventually turn, the curve would turn and go downward more drastically and
it would be elastic.
But you can apply that to someone who, a regular cigarette smoker who is working for cigarette
puffs, who has gotten six hours without smoking and you're asking questions like, how many
times are they willing to pull this knob in the lab during this three hour session?
And I do a lot of work like this in order to earn a cigarette.
How does the content of nicotine in that affect it?
How does the availability of nicotine replacement products like nicotine gum or e cigarettes
affect those decisions?
So it's a certain lens of, it's sort of a way to take the classic behavioral psychology
definition of reinforcement, which is just basically reward.
How much is this a good thing?
And it kind of breaks that apart into a multi dimensional space.
So it's not just the idea is reward or reinforcement is not unit dimensional.
So for example, you can unpack that with demand curves.
At a cheap price, you might prefer one good to another.
So the classic example is luxury versus necessity, so diamonds versus toilet paper.
So at those cheap prices, you can look at something called intensity of demand.
If it was basically as cheap as possible or essentially zero, how much would you buy of
this good?
But then you keep jacking up the price and you'll see, so diamonds will look like the
better reward at that low price or of intensity of demand side of things.
But as you keep jacking up the price, you got to have some toilet paper.
Yes.
And again, we can get into the whole like bidet thing, but forget that, you know, like, I
know Joe's been pushing that too, but you're going to hang on and keep buying the toilet
paper to a greater degree than you will the diamonds.
So you'll see a crossing of demand curves.
So what's the better reinforcer?
What's the better reward depends on your price, you know?
And so that's one, that's an example of one way to, in that, of look at addiction.
So specifically drug consumption, which is, isn't all of addiction, but it's like, in
order for something to be addictive, it has to be a reward and it has to compete with
other rewards in your life.
And one of the two main aspects of addiction in my, in my view, and this doesn't map onto
how the, you know, the DSM, the psychiatry Bible defines addiction, which I think is
largely bunk, you know, but there's some value to have some common description.
But it's, you know, how rewarding is it from this multi dimensional lens?
And specifically, how does it, how does that rewarding value compete with other rewards,
other consequences in your life?
So it's, it's not a problem if, if the use of that substance is rewarding, you know,
okay, yeah, you like to have a couple beers every once in a while and it's like not a
problem.
But then you have the alcoholic who is drinking so much that they, it tanks their career,
it ruins their marriage.
It's in competition with these pro social aspects to their life.
It's all about comparing to the other choices you're making, the other activities in your
life.
And if it, you evaluate it as a much higher reward than anything else that becomes an
addiction.
Right.
So it's the rewarding value, but it's the relative rewarding value.
And in the other major aspect, again, from behavioral economics, the thing that makes
addiction is something called delayed discounting.
So in economics, sometimes it's called time preference.
This is the, it's what compound interest rates are based upon.
It's the idea that delaying a good access to a good or reward comes with a certain decrement
to its value.
So we'd all rather have things now than later.
And we can study this at the individual level of, you know, would you rather have $9 today
or $10 tomorrow?
And you get, when you do that, you get huge differences between addicted populations and
non addicted, not just heroin and cocaine, but like just cigarette smokers, like normal,
everyday cigarette smokers.
And even when you look at something like, you know, monetary rewards.
And so you can go into the rabbit hole with, with this delayed discounting model.
So it's not only those huge differences that seem to have a face valid aspect to it, like
the cigarette smoker is choosing this thing that's rewarding today, but I know it comes
with increased risk of having these horrible consequences down the line.
So it's this competition between what's good for me now and what's good for me later.
And the other aspect about delayed discounting is that if you quantitatively map out that,
that discounting curve over time, so you don't just do the, you know, how much, you know,
that $10 tomorrow, how much is it worth to you today?
So you can say, what about nine?
What about eight?
What about $7?
And you can titrate it to find that in difference point.
And so we can say, aha, $6, you know, $10 tomorrow is worth $6 to you today.
So it's by the one day, it's decreased by 40%.
We can do that also at one week and one month and one year and 10 years and map out that
curve, get a shape of that curve.
And one of the fascinating things about this is that whether you're talking about pigeons,
making these types of choices between a little bit of food now or a little bit of food a
minute from now or rats or every, like dozens of species of animals tested, including humans,
the tendency is pretty consistently that we discount hyperbolically rather than exponentially.
What exponentially means is that every unit of time is associated with the same proportional
reduction, every unit of delay is associated with the same causes, the same proportional
reduction in value.
And that's the way the compound interest rate, you know, works, you know, that there's, you
know, compound every day, you know, you get this sort of out of whatever values in there
at the beginning of that day, you get this, you know, we'll give you this amount of extra
money to compensate you for that delay.
But then the way that all animals tend to function is of this very different way where
the reductions, the initial, that initial delay, so like one day's worth of delay, you
see a much stronger discounting rate or reduction in value than you do over those.
So you see the super proportional, then it changes to these lesser rates.
And so the implication of that, I know I've gone like really into the weeds quantitatively,
but what that means is that there's these preference reversals when you have curves
of that nature, the decay that's hyperbolic, it maps onto this phenomenon we see both in
terms of how people deal with future rewards, but also how perception works.
When two things are far away, whether it's physical distance or whether in terms of perception
or whether it's in terms of time, when you're really far away, the value, the subjective
value for that further, that delayed reward is larger.
So for example, let's say we're talking about 360 days from now, you can get $9 or 365 days
a year, now you get $10 and you're like, dude, it's a year, no difference, I'll take, why
not get one more dollar?
You bring that same exact set of choices close or nothing's changed other than the time to
both rewards and it's like, would you rather have $9 today or $10 tomorrow and plenty of
people would say, about the size, go ahead and take it today.
So you see this preference reversal and so that is, that's a model of addiction in the
sense that consistently with true addiction, I would argue, you see this competition between
molar and molecular utility.
It's like intrapersonal, like within the person competing agents, someone sometimes has control
of the bus that wants to do what's good for you in the short term and someone at other
times is in control of driving the bus and they want to do what's good for you in the
long term.
So you tell the, you're trying to quit and you see a doctor, you see your 12 step therapist
and say, God, I know this stuff is killing me, I'm really, I'm on the path, I'm done.
And that's when you're kind of in their office or wherever you're not, it's not around you.
And then later on that day, your buddy says that, hey, man, I just scored, I've got it
right here.
Do you want it?
And that reward is right in front of you.
That's like bringing those two choices right in front of you and it's like, hell yeah,
I want to use.
Yes.
And then you can go through that cycle for like years of the person telling themselves,
I want to quit, but then other times that same person is saying, I don't want to, you
know, functionally they're saying I don't want to because they're saying, yeah, like,
yeah, give me some.
So in the moment, it's very difficult to quit.
And this isn't just something, this is something that has, has huge clinical ramifications with
addiction, but it's like all humans do it.
Anyone who's had hit the snooze alarm in the morning, like the night before they realize,
oh, I got to get up extra early tomorrow.
That's what's ultimately better for me.
So I'm going to set the alarm for, you know, five AM and they, they, it goes off at five
AM, you know, and then it's, so now those two consequences have come sooner and it's
like, what the hell?
And they hit the snooze alarm and some is not just once, but then five minutes later
and five minutes later, you know, and so, and it's why it's easier to exert exercise
self control at the grocery store compared to in your fridge.
Like if that snack is like 30 seconds away in your fridge, you're going to more likely
yield to temptation than if it is further away.
So then to take a step back to something you brought up earlier, the inelasticity of pricing.
Is it from a perspective of the dealers, whether we're talking about cigarettes or maybe venturing
slightly into the illegal realm, you know, of people who sell drugs illegally, they also
have an economics to them that they said prices and all of those kinds of things.
Does addiction allow you to mess with the nature of pricing?
Like, so I kind of assume that you meant that there's a correlation between things you're
addicted to and the inelasticity of the price so you can jack up the price.
Right.
Is there something interesting to be said both for legal drugs and illegal drugs about
the kind of price games you can play because the consumers of the product are addicted?
Right.
I mean, I think you just described it, yeah, you can jack up the price and, you know, some
people are going to drop off, but the people, you know, and it's not dichotomous because
you could just consume less, but some people are going to consume less and the people that
are most addicted are going to keep, you know, I mean, you see this, they're going to keep
purchasing.
So you see this with cigarettes and so it's interesting when you interface this with policy,
like in one respect, heavily taxing cigarettes is a good thing.
We know it keeps, you know, adolescents particularly price sensitive, so you definitely, people
smoke less and especially kids smoke less when you keep cigarette prices high and you
tax the hell out of them.
But one of the downsides, you've got to balance and keep in mind is that you disproportionately
have working class, poor people, and then you get into a point where someone's spending,
you know, quarter of their paycheck on cigarettes.
So they're going to smoke no matter what and basically because they're addicted, they're
going to smoke no matter what and usually, yeah, you're taxing their existence.
Right.
So you're making it worse for, if they don't, if they are completely inelastic, you're
actually making that person's life worse because we know that by interfering with the amount
of money they have, you're interfering with the other pro social, the potential competitors
to smoking, you know, and we know that when someone's in more impoverished environments
and they have less sort of non drug alternatives, you know, the more likely they're going to
stay addicted.
So, you know.
Is there data, this is interesting from a scientific perspective of those same kind
of games in illegal drugs, sort of, because that's where most drug, I was, I mean, I don't
know, maybe you can correct me, but it seems like most drugs are currently illegal.
And so, but they're still in economics to them, obviously, as the drug war and so on.
Is there data on the setting of prices or like, how good are the business people running
the selling of drugs that are illegal?
Are they all the same kind of rules apply from a behavioral economics perspective?
I think so.
I mean, they're basically, whether they're crunching the numbers or not, they're basically
sensitive to that demand curve and they're doing the same thing that businesses do in
a legal market and, you know, you want to sell as much of a product to get as much money.
You're looking more at the total income, so if you jack the price a little bit, you're
going to get some reduction in consumption, but it may be that the total amount of money
that you rake in is going to be more than, it's going to overcompensate for that.
So you're willing to take, okay, I'm going to lose 10% of my customers, but I'm getting
more than enough to compensate from that, from the extra money from the people who still
are buying.
I think they're more, you know, and especially when we get to the lower, I wouldn't be surprised
if people are crunching those numbers and looking at demand curves, maybe at the really
high levels of the, you know, up the chain with the cartels and whatnot.
I don't know.
That wouldn't surprise me at all, but I think it's probably more implicit at the lower levels
where something he brought up, drug policy, I will say that for years now, it's been this
kind of unquestioned goal by, for example, the drug czar's office in the U.S. to make
the price of illegal drugs as high as possible without this kind of nuanced approach that,
yeah, if you make, you know, for some people, if you make the price so high, you're actually
making things worse.
I mean, I'm all about reducing the problems associated with drugs and drug addictions,
and part of that is that are more direct consequences of those drugs themselves, but a whole lot
is what you get from indirectly, and, you know, sort of the, both for the individual
and for society, so like making it a poor person who doesn't have enough money for their
kids, making them even poorer, so now you've made their children's future worse because
they're growing up in deeper poverty because you've essentially levied a tax onto this
person who's heavily addicted, but then at the societal level, you know, so everything
we know about the drug war in terms of the heavy criminalization and filling up prisons
and reducing employment and educational opportunities, which in the big picture, we know are the
things that in a free market compete against some of the worst problems of addiction is
actually having educational and employment opportunities, but when you give someone a
felony, for example, you're pretty much guaranteeing they're never going to go very high on the
economic ladder, and so you're making drugs a better reward for that person's future.
So this is a quick step into the policy realm, and I think for both you and I, I'm not sure
you can correct me, but I'm more comfortable into studying the effects of drugs on the
human behavior and human psychology versus like policies, seems like a whole giant mess,
but you know, there's some libertarian candidates for president and just libertarian thinkers
that had a nice thought experiment of possibly legalizing, I've spoken about possibly legalizing
basically all drugs in your intuition, do you think a world where all drugs are legal
is a safer world or a less safe world for the users of those drugs?
It really depends on what we mean by legalization.
So this is one of my beefs with this, you know, how these things are talked about.
I mean, we have very few completely laissez faire, you know, legal drugs.
So even caffeine is one of the few examples.
So for example, caffeine and tea and coffee is in that realm.
Like there's no limits, no one's testing, there's no laws, regulation at any level
of how much caffeine you're allowed to buy or how much in a product.
But even like with this Starbucks like Nitro, there are rules with soda and with canned products,
you can only put so much in there.
Yeah.
So this is FDA regulated and it's kind of weird because there's a limit to sodas that's
not there for energy drinks and other things.
But you know, so even caffeine, it depends on what product we're talking about.
If you're like no dose and other caffeine products over the counter, like you can't
just put 800 milligrams in there.
The pills are like one or 200 milligrams.
And so it's FDA regulated as an overcounter drug.
Some of the most dangerous drugs in society, I would say arguably one of the most dangerous
classes of drugs is the volatile anesthetics, huffing, people huffing gasoline and, you
know, airplane glue, toluene, whatnot, um, severely damaging to the nervous system.
Pretty much legal.
But there's some regulation in the sense that there's a warning label, like it's illegal
to do it for, not that it nested people, they're busting people for this, but you know, it's
against federal law to use this in a way other than intended type of the basics, like, yeah,
don't huff this, you know, um, your paint thinner, whatnot, at least keeps people from
selling it for that, like no, because they're going to, they're going to go after that person.
They're not going to be able to find the 12 year old who's huffing.
So anyway, just as some extreme examples at the end.
And then, you know, even the, the so called illegal, like schedule one drug, psilocybin,
we do plenty in, in, um, in terms of schedule two, which is ironically less restricted than
psilocybin, but methamphetamine and cocaine, I've done human research with my research
has been legal.
So they're scheduled compounds, but they're not completely illegal.
Like you can do research with them with the appropriate licensees and, um, uh, approval.
So there really is no such thing in like alcohol.
Well, it's illegal if you're 12 years old or 18 years old or 20 years old.
And for anyone, it's illegal to, to be drinking it while you're driving.
So there's always a nuance.
There's rules, right?
It's not dichotomy.
And I actually should admit, it's been on my to do list for a while to buy in Massachusetts
some like edible or buy weed legally.
I, um, yeah, haven't done that in Massachusetts, put it this way, and I, I wonder what that
experience is like, cause I get, I think it's fully legal in Massachusetts.
And so I wonder what legal drugs look like to me, you know, I grew up with even weed
being like, you know, not, it's like this forbidden thing, you know, not, not forbidden,
but it's illegal.
You know, most people, of course I never partook, but, uh, most people I knew would, uh, attain
it illegally.
And so that big switch that's been happening across the country, there's like federal stuff
going on to make a marijuana legal federal, I'm, I'm half paying attention.
There's some movement there.
I mean, the house passed a bill that's not going to be passed by the, by the Senate.
But yeah, it's, it's a progress.
There's, there's clearly a change in, right.
It's moving in a trend.
So that's the example of a drug that used to be illegal and is now becoming more and
more and more legal.
Um, so I wonder what like, uh, cocaine being legal looks like, right?
What a society with cocaine being legal looks like.
The rules around it, the, uh, you know, the processes in which you can consume it in a
safer way and be more educated about its consequences, be able to control dose and like purity much
better, be able to get help for overdose, I don't know, all those kinds of things.
I, it does in a utopian sense feel like legalizing drugs at least should be talked about and
considered versus, uh, keeping them in the dark.
I agree.
But yeah, so that in your sense, it's possible that in 50 years, uh, we legalize all drugs
and, uh, it makes for a better world.
The way I like to talk about it is that I would say that we, it's possible and it would
probably be a good thing if we regulate all drugs.
How would you regulate, uh, like cocaine, for example?
Is there, is there ideas there?
So yeah, and you were already, you know, goings, you know, where I was going with that kind
of first I described how there's always a new ones and even like the cannabis in Massachusetts,
federally illegal.
So for example, if I was like, and I, you know, colleagues that do cannabis research
where they get people high in the lab, like you're a federal funded researcher within
NIH funds, you can't get that, that stuff from the dispensary because it's, you're breaking
a federal law, even though the feds don't have the resources to go after, they don't
want the controversy at this point to go after the individual users or even the, the sellers
in those legal states.
So there's always this nuance, but it's, it's about right, the right regulation.
So I think we already know enough that, for example, like I think safe injection sites
for hard drugs, um, makes a lot of sense.
Like I wouldn't want, um, heroin and cocaine at the convenience stores.
And I don't think, maybe there's some extreme libertarians that want that.
I think even the folks that identify as libertarians, probably most of them don't, well, I don't
know, like not all of them want that, you know, um, I think, you know, that as a form
of regulation, like, look, if you're using these hard drugs on a, on a regular basis,
you're putting yourself at risk for lethal overdose, you're putting yourself at risk
for catching, um, HIV and, and hepatitis, um, if you're going to do it, if you're doing
it anyway, come to this place where at least you're not like, you know, you're like pulling
the, the, the water out of like, you know, the puddle on the side of the street.
Yeah.
So it's done by professionals and those professionals are able to educate you also.
So like a 711 clerk may not be both capable of helping you to, uh, to inject the drug
properly, but also it won't be equipped to educate you at, but the negative consequences
on those kinds of things.
That's a huge part of it, the education, but then I think with the opioids, like the big
part of it is just like with naloxone, which is an antagonist, it goes into the, um, the
receptor.
It's called Narcan.
That's the trade name, but it's what they revive people on an opioid overdose.
That's almost completely effective.
Like if there's a medical professional there and someone's ODing on an opioid, they're
virtually guaranteed to live.
Like that's remarkable that if a hundred percent at the opioid crisis, you know, if all of
those people right now that are dying, we're doing that in the presence of a medical professional,
like even just like a nurse with Narcan, there'd be basic almost no deaths.
There's always some exceptions, but you know, almost no deaths.
Like that's staggering to me.
So the idea that people are doing this, you know, that we could have that level of positive
effect without encouraging the drug.
And this is where like you get into this like terrain of like sending the wrong message
and it's like, no, you can do that.
You can say like, we're not encouraging this.
In fact, probably one of the greatest advertisements for not getting hooked on heroin is like visiting
a methadone clinic, visiting a safe injection site.
Like, like this is not like an advertisement for getting hooked on this drug, but knowing
that we can save people.
Now you have a landscape here because a lot of times it's just like supervised injection,
but you bring your own stuff, you know, you bring your own heroin, which could still be
you know, dirty and filled with fentanyl and fentanyl derivatives, which because of the
incredible potency and the more difficulty measuring it, and some differences at the
receptor, like you may be more likely, you are more likely on average to lethally overdose
on it.
You know, so you could the level that's been more explored in Switzerland is in some places
is you actually provide the drug itself and you supervise the injection.
So I don't see...
Do you like that idea?
Yeah.
The public health data are completely on the side of there's really no credible evidence
to this.
If we allow that, we're sending the wrong message and everyone's going to be, I mean, I'm not
showing up like, you know, and it's different by drug like, yeah, you, you legalize, you
set up cannabis shops and some people are going to say, so you come and go there.
I don't think a whole lot of people are going to go to one of these places and say, I'm
going to shoot up heroin for the first time because, and even if like, you know, it's
a country of 300 million people, like even if someone does that, you have to compare
this to the everyday people are dying from opioid overdoses, like people's kids, people's
uncles, people's like, these are real lives that are being shattered.
So you just look at that.
And then the other thing, and I know this from having done residential, even like non
treatment research where we just have a cocaine user or something, stay on our inpatient word
for a month and you really get to know them and sometimes you see, like oftentimes that's
the first time this person has had a discussion with a medical professional, any type of professional
in their entire life around their drug use, even if they're not looking to quit.
And it's like, I, you know, you could imagine that in the safe injection settings where
it's like, it might be a year into treatment and they're like, you know, doc, I know you're
not the cops.
Like you really care for me.
Like, I think I'm ready to try that methadone thing.
I think I'm really, I think I want to be done.
I want to be done.
Yeah, they get to trust the people and, and realize that they're, they're there because
they truly like, they have a compassion, a love for, for, for this community, like as
human beings and they don't want people to die.
And you get real human connections and that, and again, like those are the conditions where
people are going to ultimately seek treatment.
And not everyone always will, but you're, you're going to get that.
And then you're, you know, you're going to get people like looking into treatment options.
You know, maybe it's years into, to the treatment.
So it's like, they're just all of these indirect benefits that I think at that level, I don't
know if you'd call that legalizing, you know, I think again, right, at least well regulated.
Right.
Whatever that word is.
Yeah.
Well regulated, but out in the open.
Right.
Minimizing as many harms as we can, while not encouraging.
I mean, we don't encourage people to drink all the, I mean, people die every year from
caffeine overdose.
Like, you know, and there's different ways to like, you know, like, you know, like,
just by allowing something doesn't mean we're sending the message that, you know, by saying
we're not going to give you a felony, which is actually often the, the, the, the, the
penalty for, for psychedelics.
I just actually testified for the judiciary committee, the, the Senate, the assembly in,
in New Jersey.
And just to move psilocybin from a felony to misdemeanor, they use different language
It's weird, but like the equivalent of felony and misdemeanor, and that was like two people
didn't vote for that on the, on this committee, because it was might, one of them said it
might be sending the wrong message and it's like a felony.
I mean, there's real harms.
Like that's the scarlet letter the rest of your life.
You're stuck at the lower ends of the employment ladder.
You're not going to get, you know, loans for education, all of this, maybe because of a
stupid mistake you made once as a 19 year old.
Doing something that like, you know, a presidential candidate could have done and admitted to
and had no problem.
You know, yeah, what drug is the most addictive, the most dangerous in your view?
Not maybe like, not technically like specifically which drug, but more like in our society today.
What is a highly problematic drug?
We talked about psychedelics not being that addictive on the other flip side of that.
You mentioned cocaine.
Is that, is that the top one?
Is there something else that's a concern to you?
It depends.
And you've already alluded to this nuance.
It depends on how you define it.
If we're talking about on the ground today in, you know, modern society, I'd say nicotine
tobacco.
Oh, interesting.
I mean, in terms of mortality, it kills, it kills far more than any other drug known
to humankind four times more than alcohol, like a half million deaths in the US every
year and about five to six million worldwide due to tobacco.
That's four times more in the US than alcohol.
And if you graph all of the drugs, legal and illegal, like, you know, put all of the illegal
drugs in like one category on that figure and you put alcohol and tobacco on that figure,
all the illegal drugs combined, barely, they're a barely visible blip to this incredible, like
it's, there's no, even all of the opioid epidemic rolled up along with cocaine and everything
else in the meth barely shows up compared to tobacco.
That's one of those uncomfortable truths that I don't know what to do with.
It's like, where everybody's freaking out about coronavirus, right?
And nobody's.
The relative.
It's, it's all relative.
If you look at the relative thing, it's like, well, why aren't we freaking out about now
cigarettes, which, which we are increasingly so over the historically speaking, right?
Right.
It's like terrorism versus swimming pools.
I remember that being back in the, after the war on terrorists started, it's like, yeah,
there's not even comparison.
Okay.
So, you know, that's a little sobering truth there.
Cause I was thinking like cocaine, I was thinking about all of these hard drugs, but the reality
is relatively nicotine is the, is the big one.
When you didn't ask about mortality or deaths, you asked about addiction, but that's, that
really is hard to, hard to evaluate.
It gets into those nuances I spoke of before about there's not a unit dimensional way to
measure reinforcement.
It kind of depends on the situation and, and what measure we're looking at.
But, you know, more people have access to tobacco and I'm not, I'm not advocating that we make
it an illegal drug.
I think that would, it was a hard, would be a horrible mistake, although there is a very
credible push to, to mandate the reduction of nicotine in cigarettes, which I have most
scientists that study it are for it.
I think there's some real dangers there because I see that in the broader history of drug
use.
It's like, when has drug prohibition worked broadly speaking?
And, and it's, it's, to me, that would, that, that path would only make sense in very good
conjunction with eCigarettes, which once they're fully regulated can be a safer, not safe, but
much safer alternative.
And if we don't, if we tax the hell out of eCigarettes and ban every attractive feature
like, like flavors and everything, then that's going to push people to a black market if
they can't get the real thing from real cigarettes.
Some people will just quit straight out, but I think with the regulators and what a lot
of scientists that study tobacco like myself, it's a big part still of what I study, they're
not used to thinking about the, like tobacco really as a, as a drug, largely speaking in
terms of, you know, for example, the history of prohibition.
And I think of like, we already know there's an illicit market, a black market for tobacco
to get around, you know, taxes, I mean, and for selling even loose cigarettes.
That's what initially caused in Staten Island, the police to approach, was it Eric Garland
who is selling loose cigarettes and he got choked out.
I mean, the thing that caused that police contact was he was selling, well, I think
reported to sell individual cigarettes for like, you know, you could sell them for quarter,
happens in Baltimore.
And it's like, that's technically illegal.
But you know, are you not going to have massive boats of, you know, supplies coming over from
China and elsewhere of real deal cigarettes if you ban, you know, the sale of nicotine?
Like it's obviously going to happen and you have to weigh that against, you know, you're
going to create a black market to one size or another.
And your intuition that really hasn't worked throughout the history when we've tried it.
Right.
But I see a potential path forward, but only if it's well, if it's not in conjunction with
eCigarettes.
If there's a clear alternative that's a positive alternative that it kind of stares the population
that, right, towards an alternative.
Yeah.
The unique thing that could be taken advantage of here is nicotine is by and large not what
causes the harm.
It's the aromatic hydrocarbons, it's the carcinogens and tobacco, it's burning tobacco smoke.
It's not the nicotine.
So that it's not like alcohol prohibition where like, you know, you couldn't create
the adules, the near beer is not going to have the alcohol.
And so people like, here you do have the possibility of giving another medium, the ability to
deliver the drug, which still aren't, to a lot of people, isn't preferred to the tobacco,
but nonetheless, again, if you over regulate those and make them less attractive, like if
you aren't thoughtful about the nicotine limits and thoughtful about whether you're
allowing flavors and everything, and if you over tax them, you're actually decreasing
the ability to compete with the more dangerous product.
So I feel that like there is a potential path forward, but I don't have a lot of confidence
that that's going to be done in a thoughtful, analytical way.
And I'm afraid that it could decrease the increase of black market calls all of the
harms.
Like every other drug we're moving away from the heavy, from the prohibition models slowly,
but the big barge ship is like making a very slow turn and like, okay, we really had a
step back and question if we want to with nicotine tobacco, are we moving into that
direction?
Yeah.
Like big picture.
It doesn't quite make sense.
You've done a study on cocaine and sexual decision making, can you explain the findings?
I mean, in a broad sense, how do you do a study that involves cocaine and the other,
how do you do a study involving this sexual decision making?
And then how do you do a study that combines both?
Yeah.
Sex and drugs too.
I'm just missing the rock and roll.
The rock and roll.
The two controversial.
Rock and roll isn't very controversial anymore, but yeah, so the cocaine, you know, lots of
hoops to drum through.
You got to have a lot of medical support.
You got to be at a basically an institution, a research unit like I'm at that has a long
history and the ability to do that and get ethics approval, get FDA approval, but it's
possible.
And whenever you're dealing with something like cocaine, you would never want to give
that to someone who hasn't already used cocaine and you want to make sure you're not giving
it to someone who is an active user who wants to quit.
So the idea is like, okay, if you're using this type of drug anyway and you're really
sure you're not looking to quit, hey, use a couple of times in the lab with us so we
can at least learn something.
And part of what we learn is maybe to help people not use and reduce the harms of cocaine.
So there's hoops to jump through.
With the sexual decision making, I looked at the main thing I looked at was this model
of I applied delayed discounting to what we talked about earlier than now versus later
that kind of decision making that goes along with addiction.
I applied that to condom use decisions and I've done probably published about 20 or so
papers with this and different drugs and...
So the primary metric is whether you do or don't use a condom?
Right.
All hypothetical...
And so this is using hypothetical decision making, but I've published some studies looking
at showing a tight correspondence to self reported in correlational studies to self reported
behavior.
So this is like, how do you do a questionnaire kind of thing?
Right.
So it's not quite a questionnaire, but it's a behavioral task requiring them to respond
to see...
You show pictures of a bunch of individuals and it's kind of like one of these fun behavioral
like a lot of them you get like numbers are born, but it's like, okay, hot or not, like
which of these 60 people would you have a one night stand with?
Men, women to pick whatever you like, a little bit of this, a little bit of that, whatever
you're into, it's all variety there.
Out of that group, you pick some subsets of people.
Who do you think is the one you most want to have sex with the least?
He thinks most likely to have an STI or at least likely a sexually transmitted disease
by STI.
And then you could do certain decision making questions of what I've done is ask, say this
person, he'd read a vignette, this person wants to have sex with you, now you've met
them, you get a long casual sex scenario, like a one night stand, with a condoms available,
just rate your likelihood from one to 100 on this kind of scale.
Would you use it?
Would you use a condom?
But then you can change your scenario to say, okay, now imagine you have to wait five minutes
to use a condom.
So the choice is now instead of using condom versus not in terms of your likelihood scale,
it now it ranges from have sex now without a condom versus on the other end of the scale
is wait five minutes to have sex with the condom.
So you rate your likelihood of where your behavior would be along that continuum.
And then you could say, okay, well, what about an hour?
What about three hours?
What about, you know, what about 24 hours?
It's a misunderstanding.
Now without a condom or five minutes later with a condom is in the, so what's supposed
to be the preference for the person like is like, there's a lot of factors coming into
play, right?
Right.
Like there's like pleasure, personal preference, and then there's also the safety.
Those are two like, are those competing objectives?
Right.
And so we do get at that through some individual measures.
And this task is more of a face valid task where there's a lot underneath the hood.
So for most people, sex with the condom is the better reward.
But underneath the hood of that is just at the purely physical level, they'd rather have
sex with without the condom.
It's going to feel better.
What do you mean by reward?
Like when they calculate their trajectory through life and try to optimize it, then sex with
the condom is a good idea?
Well, it's really based on, I mean, yeah, yeah, presumably that's the case that there's,
but it's measured by like what would really that first question where there is no delay.
Most people say they would be at the higher net scale.
A lot of times a hundred percent, they would say they would definitely use a condom.
Not everybody.
And we know that's the case.
See, it's like that some people don't like, some people say, yeah, I want to use a condom,
but quarter of the time ended up not because I just get lost in the passion of the moment.
So for the people, I mean, the only reason that people, so behaviorally speaking, at
least for a large number of people in many circumstances, condom use as a reinforcer,
just because people do it, like, you know, why are they doing it?
They're not because it makes the sex feel better, but because it makes that it allows
for at least the same general reward, even if actually, even if it feels a little bit
not as good, you know, with the condom, nonetheless, they get most of the benefit without the concurrent,
oh my gosh, there's this risk of either unwanted pregnancy or getting HIV or way more likely
than HIV, you know, herpes, you know, in general, the words, et cetera, all the lovely ones.
And we've actually done research saying, like, where we gauge the probability of these individual
different STIs, and it's like, what's the heavy hitter in terms of what people are
using to judge, you know, to evaluate whether they're going to use a condom.
So that's why the condom use is the delayed thing.
The minutes are more, and then, yeah, because that's the preferred.
Which would normally be the larger, later reward, like the $10 versus the nine.
It's like the $10, which is counterintuitive if you just think about the physical pleasure.
So that's a good thing to measure.
So condom use is a really good, concrete, quantitative, quantifiable thing that you
can use in a study, and then you can add a lot of different elements, like the presence
of cocaine and so on.
Yeah, you can get people loaded on, like, any number of drugs, like cocaine, alcohol,
and methamphetamine are the three that I've done and published on.
And it's interesting that...
These are fun studies, man.
Right.
I love to get people loaded in a safe context, and like, but to really...
It started like there was some early research in alcohol.
Fascinating.
I mean, the psychedelics are the most interesting, but it's like all of these drugs are fascinating.
The fact that all of these are keys that unlock a certain, like, psychological experience
in the head.
And so there was this work with alcohol that showed that it didn't affect those monetary
delay discounting decisions, you know, $9 now versus $10 later, and then like getting
people drunk.
And I thought to myself, are you telling me that, you know, getting someone that people
being drunk does not cause people, at least sometimes to make, to choose what's good for
them in the short term at the expense of what's good for them in the long term?
It's like, you know, bullshit, you know, like, we see it, like...
But in what context does that happen?
So that's something that inspired me to go in this direction of like, aha, risky sexual
decisions is something they do when they're drunk.
They don't necessarily go home and even though some people have gambling problems and alcohol
interacts with that, the most typical thing is not for people to go home, you know, log
on and change their allocation and their retirement account or something like that, you know, like...
But they're more likely, risky sexual decisions, they're more likely to not wait the five minutes
for the condom and instead go no condom now.
Right.
So we see an effect and we see that and interestingly, we do not see with those different drugs,
we don't see an effect if we just look at that zero delay condition.
In other words, the condom's right there waiting to be used, would you...
How likely are to use it?
You don't see it.
I mean, people are by and large going to use the condom.
So and that's the way most of this research outside of behavioral economics that's just
looked at condom use decisions, very little of which has ever actually administered the
drugs, which is another unique aspect.
But they usually just look at like assuming the condom is there, but this is more using
behavioral economics to delve in and model something that and I've done survey research
on this, modeling what actually happens.
Like you meet someone at a laundry mat, like you weren't planning on like, you know, one
thing leads to another, they live around the corner, you know.
These things, you know, and like we did one survey with men who have sex with men and
found that 25% of them, 24%, about a quarter reported in the last six months that they
had unprotected anal intercourse, which is the most risky in terms of sexually transmitted
infection.
In the last six months, in a situation where they would have used a condom, but they simply
didn't use one just because they didn't have one on them.
So this to me, it's like, if unless we delve into this and understand this, these suboptimal
conditions, we're not going to fully address the problem.
There's plenty of people that say, yep, condom use is good.
I use it a lot of the time.
You know, it's like, where is that failing?
And it's under these suboptimal conditions, which in Frank, if you think about it, it's
like most of the case.
Action is unfolding, things are getting hot and heavy.
Someone's like, do you got a condom?
No.
It's like, do they break the action and take 10 minutes to go to the convenience store
or whatever?
Maybe everything's closed.
Maybe they got to wait till tomorrow.
And though there's something to be studied there on the, that just seems like an unfortunate
set of circumstances.
Like what's the solution to that is, I mean, what's the psychology that needs to be like
taken apart there?
Because it just seems like that's the way of life.
We don't expect the things that to happen.
Are we supposed to expect them better to be like, be self aware enough about our calculations?
Or you see the 10 minute detour to a convenience store as a kind of thing that we need to understand
how we humans evaluate the cost of that.
I think in terms of like how we use this to help people, it's mostly on the environment
side rather than on the, on the, on the, on the, on the, on the, on the, on the, on the
those, those interact.
So it's like, you know, in one sense, if you're especially, if you're going to be drinking
or using another substance that, that is associated with, you know, a stimulant, alcohol and
stimulants go along with risky sex, you know, good to be aware that you might make decisions
just to tell yourself, you might make a decision that, that is going to, that you wouldn't
made in your sober state.
And so, hey, throwing a condom in the, in the purse and the, in the pocket, you know,
might be, you know, a good idea.
I think at the environmental level, just more condom, I mean, it highlights what we know
about just making condoms widely available.
Something that I'd like to do is like, you know, reinforcing condom use, you know, so,
you know, just getting people used to carrying a condom everywhere they go, because it's
such a once it's in someone's habit, if they are, say, like a young single person and,
you know, it's, you know, they occasionally have unprotected sex, like training those
people, like, what if you got a text message, you know, once every few days saying, ah,
if you show me a, send back a photo of a condom within a minute, you get a reward of $5.
You could shape that up, like that it's a process called contingency management.
It's basically just straight up operant reinforcement.
You could shape that up with no problem.
And, and I mean, those procedures of contingency management, giving people systematic rewards
is like, for example, the most powerful way to, to, to reduce cocaine use and addicted
people.
And, but by saying, if you show me a negative urine for cocaine, I'm going to give you a
monetary reward.
And like that has huge effects in terms of decreasing cocaine use.
If that can be that powerful for something like stopping cocaine use, how powerful for
that?
Could that be for shaping up just carrying a condom?
Because the primary, unlike cocaine use here, we're not saying you can't have the main reward.
Like you could still have sex and you can even have sex in the way that you tell yourself
you'd rather do it, you know, if the condom is available, you know, so, you know, like,
you're not, you know, it's relatively speaking, it's way easier than like not using cocaine.
If you like using cocaine, it's just basically getting in the habit of carrying a condom.
So that's just one idea of like, what?
There could be also the capitalistic solutions of like, there could be a business opportunity
for like a door dash for condoms, like, like delivery, I thought about this within five
minute delivery of a condom at any location, like Uber for condoms.
I've thought about it, not with condoms, but a very similar line of thinking, a line that
you're going into in terms of Uber and people getting drunk when they, they into the bar
playing to have one or two, they ended up having five or six and it's like, okay, yeah,
you could take the cab home, the Uber home, but you've left your car there, it might get
towed, you might like, there's also the hassle of just, you know, you want to wake up tomorrow
with your hangover and forget about it and move on.
Like, and I think a lot of people in their situation and they're like, screw it, I'm
going to take the risk, just get it, you know, what if you had an Uber service where two,
you know, you have a two, some, a car come out with two drivers and one of them, two sober
drivers obviously, and they, and the person they, the one driver drops off the other that
then drives you home in their car, in your car, so that you can, I mean, I think a lot
of people would pay 50 bucks, it's going to be more than a regular Uber, but it's like,
it's going to be done.
I got the money, I already spent 60 bucks at the bar tonight, like, just get the damn
thing done, tomorrow I'm done with it, my car, I wake up, my car's in front of my house.
I think that would be, I think someone could, I'm not going to open that business, so like,
if anyone hears this and wants to take off with that, like, I think it could help a lot
of people.
Yeah, definitely.
An Uber itself, I would say, helped a huge amount of people, just making it easy to make
the decision of going home while not driving yourself.
I read about in Austin where they, I don't know where it's at now, where they outlawed
Uber for a while, you know, because of the whole taxi cab union type thing and how just,
yeah, there were like hordes of drunk people that were used to Uber that now didn't have
a cheap alternative.
So just, we didn't exactly mention, you've done a lot of studies in sexual decision making
with different drugs.
Is there some interesting insights or findings on the difference between the different drugs?
So I think you said meth as well, so cocaine, is there some interesting characteristics
about decision making that these drugs alter versus like alcohol, all those kinds of things?
I think, and there's much more to study with this, but I think the biggie there is that
the stimulants, they create risky sex by really increasing the rewarding value of sex.
Like if you talk to people that are really, especially that are hooked on stimulants,
one of the biggies is like sex on coke or meth is like so much better than sex without.
And that's a big part of why they have trouble quitting, because it's so tied to their sex
life.
I think your decision making is broken, it's just that you, well, you allocate.
It's a different aspect of their decision, yeah, on the reward side.
I think on the alcohol, it works more through disinhibition.
It's like alcohol is really good at reducing the ability of a delayed punisher to have
an effect on current behavior.
In other words, there's this bad thing that's going to happen tomorrow or a week from now
or 20 years from now.
Being drunk is a really good way, and you see this in like rats making decisions.
A high dose of alcohol makes someone less sensitive to those consequences.
So I think that's the lever that's being hit with alcohol, and it's more just increasing
the rewarding value of sex by the psychostimulants on that side.
We actually found that it, and it was amazing, because hundreds of millions of dollars have
been spent by NIH to study the connection between cocaine and HIV.
We ran the first study on my grant that actually just gave people cocaine under double blind
conditions and showed that when people are on coke, their ratings of sexual desire, even
though they're not in a sexual situation, yeah, you showed them some pictures, but they're
just saying they're horny.
You get subjective ratings of how much sexual desire you're feeling right now.
People get horny when they're on stimulants, and a lot of people say duh if they really
know these drugs.
But that's a rigorous study that's in the lab that shows like, there's a plot, the dose
effects of that, the time course of that, yeah, it's not just.
Can you please tell me there's a paper with a plot that shows dose versus evaluation of
like horniness?
Yeah, we didn't say horniness, we said sexual arousal.
Sex.
Yeah, basically, yeah.
There's a plot, I'm going to find this plot.
Right, I'll send it to you.
There was one headline from some publicity on the work that said, horny cocaine users
don't use condoms or something like that.
You got to love journalism.
I wouldn't have put it that way, but yeah, that's right on.
I guess that's what it finds.
So you've published a bunch of studies on psychedelics.
Is there some especially favorite insightful findings from some of these that you could
talk about, maybe favorite studies or just something that pops to mind in terms of both
the goals and the major insights gained and maybe the side little curiosities that you
discovered along the way?
Yeah, I think of the work with using psilocybin to help people quit smoking and we've talked
about smoking being such a serious addiction and so that what inspired me to get into that
was just having behavioral psychology as my primary lens, this sort of radical empirical
basis of, I'm really interested in the mystical experience and all of these reports.
Very interested, but at the same time, I'm like, okay, let's get down to some behavior
change and something that we can record, like quantitatively verify biologically.
To find all kinds of negative behaviors that people practice and see if we can turn those
into positive.
Right, like really change it, not just people saying, which again is interesting, I'm not
dismissing it, but folks that say my life has turned around, I feel this has completely
changed me.
It's like, yep, that's good.
All right, let's see if we can harness that and test that into something that's real
behavior change.
You know what I mean?
It's quantifiable.
It's like, okay, you've been smoking for 30 years.
That's a real thing and you've tried a dozen times seriously to quit and you haven't been
able to long term, okay, and if you quit, we'll ask you and I'll believe you but I don't trust
everyone reading the paper to believe you.
So we're going to have you pee in a cup and we'll test that and we'll have you blow into
this little machine that measures carbon monoxide and we'll test that.
So multiple levels of biological verification.
Now we're getting, to me, that's where the rubber meets the road in terms of therapeutics.
It's like, can we really shift behavior and so much as we talked about my other scientific
work outside of psychedelics is about understanding addiction and drug use.
So it's like looking at addiction, it's a no brainer and smoking is just a great example.
And so back to your question, we've had really high success rates.
It rivals anything that's been published in the scientific literature.
The caveat is that, you know, that's based on our initial trial of only 15 people but
extremely high long term success rates, 80% at six months per foot, smoke free.
So can we discuss the details and so first of all, which psychedelic we're talking about
and maybe can you talk about the 15 people and how the study ran and what you found?
Yeah, yeah.
So the drug we're using is psilocybin and we're using moderately high and high doses
of psilocybin.
And I should say this about most of our work.
These are not kind of museum level doses.
In other words, nothing, even big fans of psychedelics want to take and go to a concert
or go to the museum.
If someone's a burning man on this type of dose, like they're probably going to want
to find their way back to their tent and zip up and hunker down for, you know, not be around
strangers.
By the way, the delivery method, psilocybin is mushrooms, I guess.
What's the usual?
Is it edible?
Is there some other way, like how is people supposed to think about the correct dosing
of these things?
Because I've heard that it's hard to dose correctly.
That's right.
So in our studies, we use the pure compound psilocybin.
So it's a single molecule, you know, a bunch of molecules.
And we give them a capsule with that in it.
And so it's just, you know, a little capsule, they swallow.
What people, when psilocybin is used outside of research, it's always in the context of
mushrooms because they're so easy to grow.
There's no market for synthetic psilocybin.
There's no reason for that to pop up.
The high dose that we use in research is 30 milligrams body weight adjusted.
So if you're a heavier person, it might be like 40 or even 50 milligrams.
We have some data that, based on that data, we're actually moving into like getting away
from the body weight adjusting of the dose and just giving an absolute dose.
It seems like there's no justification for the body weight based dosing, but I digress.
Generally 30, 40 milligrams, it's a high dose.
And based on average, even though, as you alluded to, there's variability, which gets
people into some trouble in terms of mushrooms like psilocybe cubensis, which is the most
common for species in the illicit market in the US.
This is about equivalent to five dried grams, which is right at about where, right where
McKenna and others, they call it a heroic dose.
You know, this is not hanging out with your friends, going to the concert again.
So this is a real deal dose, even to people that like really, you know, just even to psychonauts.
And even we've even had a number of studies.
Psychonauts.
Yeah, people that, yeah.
That's a great term.
Cosmonaut, you know, like for psychedelics, going as far out as possible.
But even for them, even for those who've flown to space before.
Right, right.
They're like, holy shit.
I didn't know the orbit would be that far out, you know, like, or I escaped the orbit.
I was in interplanetary space there.
So these folks in the 15 folks in the study, they're not, there's not a question of dose
being too low to truly have an impact.
Right, right.
Very out of hundreds of volunteers over the years, we've only seen a couple of people
where there was a mild effect of the, of the 30 milligrams and who knows that person's
their serotonin, they, they might have lesser density of serotonin two way receptors or
something.
We don't know.
That's pretty rare.
For most people, this is like, like something interesting is going to happen.
Put it that way.
You know, Joe Rogan, I think that Jamie, his producer is immune to a second.
So maybe he's a, he's a good recruit for the state to test.
So that's interesting.
Now, I'm not the caveat is I'm not encouraging anything illicit, but just theoretically
my first question as a far behavioral pharmacologist is like, you know, increase the dose.
Increase the dose.
You know, like really.
Nobody's immune.
I'm not telling him Jamie to do that, but like, okay, like, you know, you're taking
the same amount that friends might be taking, but yeah.
But he was also referring to the psychedelic effects of edible marijuana, which is, is
there rules on dosage for, like marijuana?
Is there limits?
Like what place where it's, this is, this all goes to probably a state by state, right?
It is, but most they've gone that direction and states that didn't initially have these
rules to have now have them.
So it was like, you'll get, I think, you know, five, 10 mill, I think 10, five or 10 milligrams
of THC being a common and, and like, and this is an important thing, like where they've
moved from not being allowed to say, like have a whole candy bar and have each of the
eight or 10 squares in the canner bar being 10 milligrams, but it's like, no, the whole
thing because like, you know, somebody gets a candy bar, they're eating the freaking candy
bar.
And it's like, unless you're a daily cannabis user, if you, if you take, you know, a hundred
milligrams, it's like, that's what could lead to a bad trip for someone.
And it's like, you know, a lot of these people, it's like, oh, you used to smoke a little
weed in college.
They might say they're visiting Denver for a business trip and they're like, why not?
Let's give it a shot.
You know, and they're like, oh, I don't want to smoke something because it's going to,
so I'm going to be safer with this edible and consume this massive, you know, but there's
huge tolerance.
So a regular, like for someone who's smoking weed every day, they might take five milligrams
and kind of hardly feel anything.
And they may not, they may really need something like 30, 40, 50 milligrams have a strong effect.
But yeah, so that's, they've evolved in terms of the rules about like, okay, what constitutes
a dose, you know, which is why you see less big candy bars and more, or if it is, you're,
if it is a whole candy bar, you're only getting a smaller dose, like 10 milligrams or yeah,
because that's where people get in trouble more often with edibles.
Yeah, except Joe Ideas, which I've heard.
That's definitely something I want to talk to out of the crazy comedians I want to talk
to.
Anyway, so yeah, 15, the study of the 15 and the dose not being a question.
So like, what was the recruitment based on?
What was the, like, how did the study get conducted?
Yeah.
So the recruitment, I really liked this fact.
It wasn't people that, you know, largely were, you know, we were honest about what we
were studying, but for most people, it was, they were in the category of like, you know,
not particularly interested in psychedelics, but more of like, they want to quit smoking.
They've tried everything, but the kitchen sink.
And this sounds like the kitchen sink, you know, and it's like, well, it's Hopkins.
So, you know, thinking that sounds like it's safe enough.
So like, what the hell?
Let's give it a shot.
Like most of them are in that category, which I really, you know, I appreciate because it's
more of a test, you know, of, yeah, just like a better model of what if these are approved
as medicines, like what you're going to have the average participant, you know, be like.
And so the therapy involves a good amount of non psilocybin sessions of preparatory sessions,
like eight hours of getting to know the person, like the two people who are going to be their
guides or the person in the room with them during the experience, having these discussions
with them where you're both kind of rapport building, just kind of discussing their life,
getting to know them.
But then also telling them, preparing them about the psilocybin experience, so it could
be scary in this sense, but here's how to handle it, trust, let go be open.
And also during that preparation time, preparing them to quit smoking, using really standard
bread and butter techniques that can all fall under the label typically of the cognitive
behavioral therapy, just stuff like before you quit, we assign a target quit date ahead
of time, you're not just quitting on the fly.
And that happens to be the target quit date in our study was the day that where they got
the first psilocybin dose, but doing things like keeping a smoking diary like, okay, during
the three weeks until you quit, every time you smoke a cigarette, just like jot down
what you're doing, what you're feeling, what situation, that type of thing, and then having
some discussion around that.
And then going over the pluses and minuses in their life that smoking kind of comes with,
being honest about the, this is what it does for me.
This is why I like it.
This is why I don't like it.
Preparing for like, what if you do slip, how to handle it, like don't dwell on guilt
because that leads to more full on relapse, just kind of treat it as a learning experience,
that type of thing.
Then you have the session day where they come in, five minutes of questionnaires, but pretty
much they jump into the, we touch base with them and we give them the capsule.
It's a serious setting, but a comfortable one.
They're in a room that looks more like a living room than like a research lab.
We measure their blood pressure than any experience, but kind of minimal kind of medical vibe to
it.
And they lay down on a couch and it's a purposefully an introspective experience.
So they're laying on a couch during most of the five to six hour experience and they're
wearing eye shades, which is a better connotation as a name than blindfold.
So they're wearing eye shades, but that's, and they're wearing headphones through which
music is played.
Mostly classical, although we've done some variation of that, I have a paper that was
recently accepted, kind of comparing it to more like gongs and harmonic bowls and that
type of thing, kind of like sound, you know, kind of.
You've also added this to the science and have a paper on the musical accompaniment
to the psychedelic experience as fast as you can.
And we found basically that about the same effect, even by a trend not significant, but
a little bit better of an effect, both in terms of subjective experience and long term,
whether it helped people quit smoking, just a little tiny, non significant trend even
favoring the novel playlist with the Tibetan singing bowls and the gongs and didgeridoo
and all of that.
So anyway, just saying, okay, we can deviate a little bit from this, like, what goes back
to the 1950s of this method of using classical music as part of this psychedelic therapy.
But they're listening to the music and they're not playing DJ in real time.
You know, it's like, you know, they're just, be the baby, you're not the decision maker
for today, go inward, trust, let go, be open.
And pretty much the only interaction, like, that we're there for is to deal with any anxiety
that comes up.
It is kind of a misnomer, in a sense.
It's more of a safety net.
And so, like, tell us if you feel some butterflies that we can provide reassurance a hold of
their hand can be very powerful.
I've had people tell me that that was like the thing that really just grounded them.
Can you break apart trust, let go, be open, what, what, so in a sense, how would you describe
the experience, the intellectual and the emotional approach that people are supposed to take
to really let go into the experience?
Yeah, so trust is, trust the context, you know, trust the guides, trust the overall
in institutional context, I see it as layers of like safety, even though it's everything
I told you about the relative bodily safety of psilocybin, nonetheless, we're still getting
blood pressure throughout the session, just in case.
We have a physician on hand who can respond just in case.
We're literally across the street from the emergency department, just in case, you know,
all of that, you know.
Privacy is another thing you've talked about, just trusting that you're, whatever happens
is just between you and the people in the study.
Right, and hopefully they've really gotten that by that point deep into the study that,
like, they realize we take that seriously and everything else, you know, and so it's
really kind of like a very special role you're playing as a researcher or guide and hopefully
they have your trust.
And so, you know, and trust that they could be as emotional, everything from laughter to
tears, like, that's going to be welcomed, we're not judging them.
It's like, it's a therapeutic relationship where, you know, this is a safe container,
it's a safe space.
Safe space.
That has a lot of baggage to that term.
But it truly is, it's a safe space for that, for this type of experience and to let go.
So trust, let's see, let go, so that relates to the emotional, like, you feel like crying,
cry.
You feel like laughing your ass off, laugh your ass off, you know, it's like, all the
things actually that, sometimes it's more challenging with a, someone has a large recreational
use, sometimes it's harder for them because people in that context, and understandably
so, it's more about holding your shit.
Someone's had a bunch of mushrooms at a party, maybe they don't want to go into the back
room and start crying about this, these thoughts about the relationship with their mother.
And they don't want to be the drama queen or king that bring their friends down, because
their friends are having an experience too.
And so they want to, like, compose, you know.
And also just the appearance in social settings versus the, so like prioritizing how you appear
to others versus the prioritizing the depth of the experience.
And here in the study, you can prioritize the experience.
Right.
There's a lot about, like, you're the astronaut and we're, there's only one astronaut, we're
ground control.
And I use this often with, I have a photo of the space shuttle on a plaque in my office
and I kind of often use that as an example.
And it's like, we're here for you, like we're a team, but we have different roles.
It's just like, you don't have to like compose yourself, like you don't have to like be concerned
about our safety, like we're playing these roles today.
And like, yeah, your job is to go as deep as possible or as far out, whatever your analogy
is, like as possible.
And we're keeping you safe.
And so, yeah, and you really, the emotional side is a hard one, you know, because you
really want people to, like if they go into realms of subjectively of despair and sorrow,
like, yeah, like cry, you know, like it's okay, you know, and especially if someone's
a, you know, more macho, and, you know, you want this to be the place where they can let
go.
And again, something that they wouldn't or shouldn't do if someone was to theoretically
use it in a social setting.
And like, and also these other things, like even that you get in those social settings
of like, yeah, you don't have to like worry about your wallet for being taken advantage
or for socially for a woman sexually assaulted by some creep at a concert or something because
they're, you know, they're laying down, even being far out of the session.
There's like a million sources of anxiety that are external versus internal.
So you can just focus on your own, like the beautiful thing that's going on in your mind.
And even the cops at that layer, even though it's extremely unlikely for most people that
cops would come in and bust them right when, like even at that theoretical, like that one
in a billion chance, like that might be a real thing psychologically.
In this context, we even got that covered.
This is, we've got DEA approval.
Yeah.
Like you are, this is okay by every level of society that counts, you know, that has
the authority.
So it's, so go deep, trust the, you know, trust the setting, trust yourself, you know,
let go and be open.
So in the experience, and this is all subjective and by analogy, but like, if there's a door,
open it, go into it.
If there's a stairwell, go down it or stairway, go up it.
If there's a monster in the mind's eye, you know, don't run, approach it, look in the
eye and say, you know, let's talk.
Yeah.
What's up?
What are you doing here?
Let's talk turkey, you know.
Dick Goggins entered the chat.
Okay.
Right.
It really is that.
That really is a heart of this, this radical courage.
Like it.
Courage.
People are often struck by that coming out.
Like this is heavy lifting.
This is a hard work.
People come out of this exhausted.
And it can be extremely...
Some people say it's the most difficult thing they've done in their life, like choosing
to let go on a moment, a microsecond by microsecond basis.
Everything in their inclination is to say stop sometimes, stop this.
I don't like this.
I didn't know it was going to be like this.
This is too much.
And Terrence McKenna put it this way.
It's like comparing to meditation and other techniques, it's like spending years trying
to press the accelerator to make something happen.
Pytose psychedelics is like you're speeding down the mountain in a fully loaded semi truck
and you're charged with not slamming the brake.
It's like, let it happen.
So it's very difficult and to engage.
Always go further into it and take that radical courage throughout.
What do they say in self report?
If you can put general words to it, what is their experience like?
What do they say it's like?
Because these are many people like you said that haven't probably read much about psychedelics
or they don't have like with Joe Rogan, like language or stories to put on it.
So this is very raw self report of experiences.
What do they say the experience is like?
Yeah.
And some more so than others because everyone has been exposed at some level or another,
but some it is pretty superficial as you're saying.
One of the hallmarks of psychedelics is just their variability.
So it's like not the mean, but the standard deviation is so wide that it could be like
hellish experiences and just absolutely beautiful and loving experiences.
Everything in between and both of those.
Those could be two minutes apart from each other.
And sometimes kind of at the same time concurrently.
So let's see, there's different ways to...
There were some Jungian psychologists back in the 60s, masters in Houston that wrote
a really good book, The Varieties of Psychedelic Experience, kind of which is a play on varieties
of religious experience by William James, that they described this a perceptual level.
So most people have that, whether they're looking at the room without the eyeshades
on or inside their mind's eye with the eyeshades on, colors, sounds like this.
It's a much richer sensorium, which can be very interesting.
And then at another level, a masters in Houston called it the psychodynamic level.
And I think you could think about it more broadly than that's kind of Jungian, but just
the personal psychological levels, how I think of it, like this is about your life, there's
a whole life review.
And oftentimes people have thoughts about their childhood, about their relationships, their
spouse or partner, their children, their parents, their family of origin, their current family.
That stuff comes up a lot, including people just pouring with tears about how much it
hits them so hard, how much they love people.
In a way, people that they'd love their family, but it just hits them so hard that how important
this is and the magnitude of that love and what that means in their life.
So those are some of the most moving experiences to be present for is where people, it hits
home like what really matters in their life.
And then you have this sort of what masters in Houston called the archetypal realm, which
again is sort of Jungian with the focus on archetypes, which is interesting, but I think
of that more generally as like symbolic level.
So just really deep experiences where you have, you do have experiences that seem symbolic
of very much in like what we know about dreaming and what most people think about dreaming.
There's this randomness of things, but sometimes it's pretty clear and retrospect, oh, like
this came up because this thing has been on my mind recently.
So there seems to be this symbolic level.
And then they have this, the last level that they describe is the mystical integral level,
which in this is where there's lots of terms for it, but transcendental experiences, experiences
of unity, mystical type effects we often measure.
Europeans use a scale that will refer to oceanic boundlessness.
This is all pretty much the same thing.
This is like at some sense, the deepest level of the very sense of self seems to be dissolved,
minimize or expanded such that the boundaries of the self go into, and here I think some
of this is just semantics, but whether the self is expanding such that there's no boundary
between the self and the rest of the universe or whether there's no sense of self again
might be just semantics, but this radical shift or sense of loss of sense of self or
self boundaries.
And that's like the most typically when people have that experience, they'll often report
that as being the most remarkable thing.
And this is what you don't typically get with MDMA, these deepest levels of the nature
of reality itself, the subjectivity and objectivity, just like the seer and the seeing become one
and it's a process.
And yeah.
And they're able to bring that experience back and be able to describe it?
Yeah, but to a degree, but one of the hallmarks going back to William James of describing
a mystical experience is the ineffability.
And so even though it's ineffable, people try as far as they can to describe it, but
when you get the real deal, they'll say, and even though they say a lot of helpful things
to help you describe the landscape, they'll say, no matter what I say, I'm still not even
coming anywhere close to what this was.
Like the language is completely failing.
And I like to joke that even though it's ineffable, and we're researchers, so we try to eff
it up by asking them to describe the experience.
I love it.
Yeah.
It's a good one.
But to bring it back a little bit, so for that particular study on tobacco, what was
the results, what was the conclusions in terms of the impact of psilocybin on their addiction?
So in that pilot study, it was very small, and it wasn't a randomized study.
So it was limited.
The only question we could really answer was, is this worthy enough of follow up?
And the answer to that was absolutely freaking lootily, because the success rates were so
high, 80% biologically confirmed successful at six months, that held up to 60% biologically
confirmed abstinence at an average of two and a half years, a very long fall.
Yeah.
And so, I mean, the best that's been reported in the literature for smoking cessation is
in the upper 50%, and that's with not one, but two medications for a couple of months,
followed by regular cognitive behavioral therapy, where you're coming in once a week or once
every few weeks for an entire year.
And so, you know, it's very heavy.
This is just like a few uses of psilocybin?
So this was three doses of psilocybin, over a total course, including preparation, everything
a 15 week period, where there's mainly like, for most part, one meeting a week, and then
the three sessions are within that.
And so it's, and we scale that back in the more, the study we're doing right now, which
I can tell you about, which is a randomized controlled trial.
But it's the, yeah, the original pilot study was these 15 people.
So given the positive signal from the first study telling us that it was a worthy pursuit,
we hustled up some money to actually be able to afford a larger trial.
So it's randomizing 80 people to get either one psilocybin session, we've scaled that
down from three to one, mainly because we're doing FMRI neuroimaging before and after,
and it made it more experimentally complex to have multiple sessions.
But one psilocybin session versus the nicotine patch using the FDA approved label, like standard
use of the nicotine patch.
So it's randomized, 40 people get randomized to psilocybin, one session, 40 people get
nicotine patch, and they all get the same cognitive behavioral therapies for the standard
talk therapy.
And we've scaled it down somewhat, so there's less weekly meetings, but it's within the
same ballpark.
And right now, we're still, the study's still ongoing, and in fact, we just recently started
recruiting again.
We paused for COVID.
Now we're starting back up with some protections like masks and whatnot.
But right now, for the 44 people who have gotten through the one year follow up, and
so that includes 22 from each of the two groups, the success rates are extremely high.
For the psilocybin group, it's 59% have been biologically confirmed as smoke free at one
year after their quit date.
And that compares to 27% for the nicotine patch, which by the way, is extremely good
for the nicotine patch compared to previous research.
So the results could change because it's ongoing, but we're mostly done, and it's still looking
extremely positive.
So if anyone's interested, they have to be sort of be in commuting distance to the Baltimore
area, but you know, to participate, right, right to participate.
This is a, this is a good moment to bring up something.
I think a lot of what you talked about is super interesting.
And I think a lot of people listening to this.
So now it's anywhere from 300 to 600,000 people for just a regular podcast.
I know a lot of them will be very interested in what you're saying, and they're going to
look you up, they're going to find your email, and they're going to write you a long email
about some of the interesting things that found out in any of your papers.
How should people contact you?
What is the best way for that?
Would you recommend your super busy guy, you have a million things going on?
What, how should people communicate with you?
Thanks for bringing this up.
This is a, I'm glad to get the opportunity to address this.
If someone's interested in participating in a study, the best thing to do is go to the
website.
Yeah.
Of the study or of like, yeah, which website?
So we have all of our psilocybin studies.
So everything we have is up on one website, and then we link to the different study websites,
but hopkinspsychedelic.org.
So everything we do, or if you don't remember that, just go to your favorite search engine
and look up Johns Hopkins Psychedelic, and you're going to find one of the first hits
is going to be our, is this website.
And there's going to be links to the smoking study and all of our other studies.
If there's no link to it there, we don't have a study on it now.
And if you're interested in psychedelic research more broadly, you can look up, like
at another university that might be closer to you, and there's a handful of them now
across the country, and there's some in Europe that have studies going on.
But you can, at least in the U.S., you can look at clinicaltrials.gov and look up the
term psilocybin.
And in fact, optionally, people even in Europe can register their trial on there.
So that's a good way to find studies.
But for our research, rather than emailing me, like a more efficient way is to go straight,
and you can do that first, the first phase of screening, there's some questions online,
and then someone will get back in touch with you.
But I do already, and I expect it's like going to increase, but I'm already at the level
where my simple, limited mind and limited capacity is already, I sometimes fail to get
back to emails.
I mean, I'm trying to respond to my colleagues, my mentees, all these things, my responsibilities.
And as many of the people just inquiring about, I want to go to graduate school, I'm interested
in this.
I had this, I have a daughter that took us like a duck, and she's having trot wins.
I try to respond to those, but sometimes I just simply can't get to all of them already.
To be honest, from my perspective, it's been quite heartbreaking, because I basically don't
respond to any emails anymore.
And especially as you mentioned, mentees and so on, outside of that circle, it's heartbreaking
to me how many brilliant people there are, thoughtful people, like loving people, and
they write long emails that are really, by the way, I do read them very often.
It's just that I don't, the response is then you're starting a conversation.
And the heartbreaking aspect is you only have so many hours in the day to have deep, meaningful
conversation with human beings on this earth.
And so you have to select who they are, and usually it's your family, it's people like
you're directly working with.
And even I guarantee you with this conversation, people will write you long, really thoughtful
emails, like there'll be brilliant people, faculty from all over, PhD students from all
over.
And it's heartbreaking because you can't really get back to them, but you're saying like, many
of them, if you do respond, it's more like, here, go to this website.
If you're, when you're interested into the study, just it makes sense to directly go
to the site if there's applications open, just apply for the study.
Right, right, right.
As either a volunteer or if we're looking for somebody, we're gonna be posting, including
on the Hopkins University website, we're gonna be posting if we're looking for a position.
I am right now actually looking through and it's mainly been through email and contacts,
but should I say it?
I think I'd rather cast my nets wide, but I'm looking for a postdoc right now.
So I've mentored postdocs for, I don't know, like a dozen years or so and more and more
of their time is being spent on psychedelics, so someone's free to contact me.
That's more of a, that's sort of so close to home.
That's a personal, you know, that like emailing me about that.
But I come to appreciate more the advice that folks like Tim Ferriss have of like, I think
it's him like five cents emails, you know, like, you know, a subject that gets to the
point that tells you what it's about so that like you break through the signal to the noise.
But I really appreciate what you're saying because part of the equation for me is like,
I have a three year old and like my time on the ground, on the floor, playing blocks or
cars with him is part of that equation.
And even if the day is ending and I know some of those emails are slipping by and I'll never
get back to them and I have, I'm struggling with it already and I get what you're saying
is like, I haven't seen anything yet with the type of exposure that like your podcast
gets.
This will bring an exposure.
And then I think in terms of postdocs, this is a really good podcast in the sense that
there's a lot of brilliant PhD students out there that are looking for posters from all
over from MIT, probably from Hopkins is just all over the place.
So this is, and I, we have different preferences, but my preference would also be to have like
a form that they could fill out for posts because, you know, it's very difficult through
email to tell who's a really going to be a strong collaborator for you, like a strong
postdoc, strong student, because you want a bunch of details, but at the same time,
you don't want a million pages worth of email.
So you want a little bit of application process.
So usually set up a form that helps me indicate how passionate the person is, how willing
they are to do hard work.
Like I often ask a question, people of what do you think it's more important to work
hard or to work smart?
And I use that, those types of questions to indicate who I would like to work with.
Because it's counterintuitive.
But anyway, I'll leave, I'll leave that question unanswered for people to figure out themselves.
But maybe if you know my love for David Goggins, you'll understand.
So anyway.
Those are good thoughts about the forms and everything.
It's difficult.
And that's something that evolves.
Email is such a messy thing.
There's speaking of Baltimore, Cal Newport, if you know who that is, he wrote a book
called Deep Work.
He's a computer science professor and he's currently working on a book about email, about
all the ways that email is broken.
This is going to be a fascinating read.
This is a little bit of a general question, but almost a bigger picture question that
we touched on a little bit, but let's just touch it in a full way, which is, what have
all the psychedelic studies you've conducted taught you about the human mind?
About the human brain and the human mind?
Is there something, if you look at the human scientists you were before this work and the
scientists you are now, how is your understanding of the human mind changed?
I'm thinking of that in two categories.
One kind of more scientific, and they're both scientific, but one more about the brain and
behavior in the mind, so to speak.
As a behaviorist, all we see sort of the mind as a metaphor for behaviors, but anyway, that
gets philosophical.
It's really increasing the, so the one category is increasing the appreciation for the magnitude
of depth.
These are all metaphors of human experience that might be a good way to, because you use
certain words like consciousness and what it's like, we're using constructs that aren't
well defined unless we kind of dig in, but into human experience, like that the experiences
on these compounds can be so far out there or so deep, and they're doing that by tinkering
with the same machinery that's going on up there.
My assumption, and I think it's a good assumption, is that all experiences, there's a biological
side to all phenomenal experience.
There is not, the divide between biology and experience or psychology is, it's not one
or the other.
These are just two sides of the same coin.
I mean, you're avoiding the use of the word consciousness, for example, but the experiences
are referring to the subjective experience.
It's the actual technical use of the word consciousness of, yeah, subjective experience.
Even that word, there are certain ways that, if we're talking about access consciousness
or narrative self awareness, which is an aspect of, you can wrap a definition around
that and we can talk meaningfully about it, but so often around psychedelics, it's used
in this much more in terms of ultimately explaining phenomenal consciousness itself, the so called
hard problem relating to that question and psychedelics really haven't spoken to that
and that's why it's hard because it's hard to imagine anything.
But I think what I was getting is that psychedelics have done this by, the reason I was getting
into the biology versus mind psychology divide is that just to kind of set up the fact that
I think all of our experience is related to these biological events.
So whether they be naturally occurring neurotransmitters like serotonin and dopamine and norepinephrine
et cetera, and a whole other sort of biological activity and kind of another layer up that
we could talk about as network activity, communication amongst brain areas, this is
always going on, even if I just prompt you to think about a loved one, there's something
happening biologically, okay, so that's always another side of the coin.
And another way to put that is all of our subjective experience outside of drugs, it's
all a controlled hallucination in a sense, this is completely constructed, our experience
of reality is completely a simulation.
So I think we're on solid ground to say that that's our best guess and that's a pretty
reasonable thing to say scientifically.
All the rich complexity of the world emerges from just some biology and some chemicals.
So that definition implied a causation, it comes from, and so we know at least there's
a solid correlation there, and so then we delve deep into the philosophy of idealism
or materialism and things like this, which I'm not an expert in, but I know we're getting
into that territory, you don't even necessarily have to go there, at least go to the level
of like, okay, we know there seems to be this one on one correspondence, and that seems
pretty solid, like you can't prove a negative and you can't prove, you know, it's in that
category of like, you could come up with an experience that maybe doesn't have a biological
correlate, but then you're talking about there's also the limits of the science, so is it
a false negative, but I think our best guess and a very decent assumption is that every
psychological event has a biological correlate.
So with that said, you know, the idea that you can throw, alter that biology in a pretty
trivial manner, I mean, you could take like a relatively small number of these molecules,
throw them into the nervous system, and then have a 60 year old person who has, I mean,
you name it, I mean, that has hiked to the top of Everest, and that speaks five languages,
and that has been married, and has kids and grandkids, and has, you name it, you know,
like, been at the top and say, this fundamentally changed who I am as a person, and what I think
life is about.
Like that's the thing about psychedelics that just floors me, and it never fails, I mean,
sometimes you get bogged down by the paperwork and running studies and all the, I don't know,
all of the BS that can come with being in academia and everything, and then you, and
sometimes you get some dud sessions where it's not the full, all the magic isn't happening,
and it's, you know, more or less, it's either a dud or somewhere, and I don't mean to dismiss
them, but you know, it's not like these magnificent sort of reports, but sometimes you get the
full Monty report from one of these people, and you're like, oh yeah, that's why we're
doing this, whether it's like, therapeutically or just to understand the mind, and you're
like, you're still floored, like, how was that possible?
How did we slightly alter serotonergic neurotransmission, and say, and this person is now saying that
they're making fundamental differences in the priorities of their life after 60 years?
It also just fills you with all of the possibility of experiences we're yet to have uncovered.
If just a few chemicals can change so much, it's like, man, what if this could be, I mean,
like, because we're just like, took a little, it's like lighting a match or something in
the darkness, and you could see there's a lot more there, but you don't know how much
more.
Right.
And then like, where's that going to go with like, I mean, I'm always like aware of the
fact that like, we always, as humans and as scientists think that we figured out 99%
and we're working on that first 1%, and we got to keep reminding ourselves, it's hard
to do like, we figured out like, not even 1%, like we know nothing.
And so like, I can speculate and I might sound like a fool, but like, what are drugs, even
the concept of drugs, like 10 years, 50 years, 100 years, 1,000 years if we're surviving,
like molecules that go to a specific area of the brain in combination with technology,
in combination with the magnetic stimulation, in combination with the like targeted pharmacology
of like, oh, like this subset of serotonin 2A receptors in the classroom at this time
in this particular sequence in combination with this other thing, like this baseball
cap you wear that like has, you know, has, has one of the, is doing some of these things
that we can only do with these like giant like pieces of equipment now, like where it's
going to go is going to be endless and it becomes easy to combine within virtual reality
where the virtual reality is going to move from being something out here to being more
in there.
And then we're getting, like we talked about before, we're already in a virtual reality
in terms of human perception and cognition models of the universe being all representations
and, you know, sort of, you know, color not existing and just, you know, our representations
of EM wavelengths, et cetera, you know, sound being vibrations and all of this.
And so as the external VR and the internal VR come closer to each other, like this is
what I think about in terms of the future of drugs, like all of this stuff sort of combines
and, and like where that goes is just it's, it's unthinkable.
Like we were probably going to, you know, again, it might sound like a fool and this
may not happen, but I think it's possible, you know, to go completely off line, like
where most of people's experiences may be going into these internal worlds.
And I mean, maybe you threw through some through a combination of these techniques, you create
experiences where someone could live a thousand years in terms of maybe they're living a regular
lifespan, but in over the next two seconds, you're living a thousand years worth of experience
inside, inside your mind through the, yeah, through this manipulation of the like, is
that possible?
Like just based on, on like first principles and like, I think so.
Yeah.
Like give us another fifty hundred, five hundred, like who knows, but like how could it not
go there?
And a small tangent, what are your thoughts in this broader definition of drugs, of psychedelics,
of mind altering things?
What are your thoughts about neural link and brain computer interfaces sort of being able
to electrically stimulate and read and neuronal activity in the brain and then connect that
to the computer, which is another way from a computational perspective for me is kind
of appealing, but is another way of altering subtly the behavior of the brain that's kind
of, if you zoom out reminiscent of the way psychedelics do as well.
So what do you have, like what are your thoughts about neural link, what are your hopes as
a researcher of mind altering devices, systems, chemicals?
I guess broadly speaking, I'm all for it.
I mean, for the same reason I am with psychedelics, but it comes with all the caveats.
You know, you're going into a brave new world where it's like all of a sudden there's going
to be a dark side, there's going to be, you know, that serious ethical considerations,
but that should not stop us from moving there.
I mean, particularly the stuff from an unknown expert, but on the short list in the short
term, it's like, yeah, can we help these serious neurological disorders?
Like, hell yeah.
And I'm also sensitive to something being someone that has lots of neuroscience colleagues,
you know, with some of this stuff, and I can't talk about particulars I'm not recalling,
you know, in terms of, you know, stuff getting out there and then kind of a mocking of, you
know, oh gosh, they're saying this is unique.
We know this or sort of like this belittling of like, oh, you know, this sounds like it's
just a, I don't know, a commercialization or like an oversimplification.
I forget what the example was, but something like something that came off to some of my
neuroscientific colleagues as an oversimplification or at least the way they said it.
Oh, from a neural link perspective.
Right.
Oh, we've known that for years and like, but I'm very sympathetic to like, maybe it's
because of my very limited, but relatively speaking, the amount of exposure the psychedelic
work has had to my limited experience of being out there.
And then you think about someone like, like Musk who's like, like really, really out there
and you just get all these arrows that like, and it's hard to be like when you're plowing
new ground, like you're going to get, you're going to criticize like every little word
that you, like this balance between speaking to like people to make it meaningful, something
scientists aren't very good at.
Having people understand what you're saying and then being belittled by oversimplifying
something in terms of the public message.
So I'm extremely sympathetic and I'm a big fan of like what that, you know, what Elon
Musk does, like tunnels through the ground and SpaceX and all this is like, hell yeah,
like this guy has some, he has some great ideas.
And there's something to be said, it's not just the communication to the public.
I think his first principle is thinking it's like, because I get this in the artificial
intelligence world is probably similar to neuroscience world where Elon will say something
like, or I worked at MIT, I worked on autonomous vehicles and he's sort of, I get sense how
much he pisses off like every roboticist at MIT and everybody who works on like the
human factor side of safety of autonomous vehicles in saying like, we don't need to
consider human beings in the car, like the car will drive itself.
It's obvious that neural networks is all you need.
Like it's obvious that like we should be able to systems that should be able to learn constantly
and they don't really need LiDAR.
They just need cameras because we humans just use our eyes and that's the same as cameras.
So like it doesn't, why would we need anything else and you just have to make a system that
learns faster and faster and faster and neural networks can do that.
And so that's pissing off every single community.
It's pissing off human factors community saying you don't need to consider the human
driver in the picture.
You can just focus on the robotics problem.
It's pissing off every robotics person for saying LiDAR can be just ignored.
It can be camera.
Every robotics person knows that camera is really noisy.
It's really difficult to deal with, but he's, and then every AI person who says, who hears
neural networks and says like, neural networks can learn everything, like almost presuming
that it's kind of going to achieve general intelligence.
The problem with all those haters in the three communities is that they're looking one year
ahead, five years ahead.
The hilarious thing about the, quote unquote, ridiculous things that Elon Musk is saying
is they have a pretty good shot at being true in 20 years.
And so like when you just look at the, you know, when you look at the progression of
these kinds of predictions and sometimes first principles, thinking can allow you to do that
is you see that it's kind of obvious that things are going to progress this way.
And if you just remove your, the prejudice you hold about the particular battles of the
current academic environment and just look at the big picture of the progression of the
technology, you can usually, you can usually see the world in the same kind of way.
And so in that same way, looking at psychedelics, you can see like there is so many exciting
possibilities here.
If we fully engage in the research, same thing with neural link.
If we fully engage, so we go from a thousand channels of communication of the brain to
billions of channels of communication of the brain.
And we figure out many of the details of how to do that safely with a neurosurgery and
so on, that the world would just change completely in the same kind of way that Elon is, it's
so ridiculous to hear him talk about a symbiotic relationship between AI and the human brain.
But it's like, is it though?
Is it because it's, I can see in the 50 years that's going to be an obvious, like everyone
will have, like obviously you have, like why are we typing stuff in the computer?
It doesn't make any sense.
That's stupid.
People used to type on a keyboard with a mouse.
What is that?
It seems pretty clear.
Like we're going to be there.
Yeah.
Like, and the only question is like, what's the timeframe?
Is that going to be 20 or is it 50 or 100?
How could we not?
And the thing that I guess upsets with Elon and others is the timeline he tends to do.
I think a lot of people tend to do that kind of thing.
I definitely do it, which is like, it'll be done this year versus like it'll be done in
10 years.
The timeline is a little bit too rushed, but from our leadership perspective, it inspires
the engineers to do the best work of their life to really kind of believe, because to
do the impossible, you have to first believe it, which is a really important aspect of
innovation.
And there's the delayed discounting aspect I talked about before.
It's like saying, oh, this is going to be a thing 20, 50 years from now.
It's like, what motivates anybody?
And even if you're fudging it or like wishful thinking a little bit or let's just say airing
on one side of the probability distribution, like there's value in saying like, yeah, like
there's a chance we could get this done in a year.
And you know what, and if you set a goal for a year and you're not successful, hey, you
might get it done in three years, whereas if you had aimed at 20 years, well, you either
would have never done it at all, or you would have aimed at 20 years and then would have
taken you a 10.
So the other thing I think about this, like in terms of his work and I guess we've seen
with psychedelics, it's like, there's a lack of appreciation for like sort of the variability
you need in natural selection, sort of extrapolating from biological, you know, from evolution.
Like, hey, maybe he's wrong about focusing only on the cameras and not these other things.
Be empirically driven.
It's like, yeah, you need to like when he's, you know, when you need to get the regulations,
is it safe enough to get the same on the road?
Those are real questions and be empirically driven.
And if he can meet the whatever standard is relevant, that's the standard and be driven
by that.
So don't let it affect your ethics, but if he's on the wrong path, how wonderful someone's
exploring that wrong path.
He's going to figure out it's a wrong path and like other people, he's damn it.
He's doing something.
Like he's, you know, and appreciating that variability, you know, that like it's valuable
even if he's not on, I mean, this is all over the place in science.
It's like a good theory.
One standard definition is that it generates testable hypotheses and like the ultimate
model is never going to be the same as reality.
Some models are going to work better than others like, you know, Newtonian physics got
us a long ways, even if there was a better model, like waiting.
And some models weren't as good as, you know, we're never that successful, but just even
like putting them out there and test it.
We wouldn't know something is a bad model until someone puts it out anyway.
So yeah.
Diversity of ideas is essential for progress.
Yeah.
So we brought up consciousness a few times.
There's several things I want to kind of disentangle there.
The one you've recently wrote a paper titled consciousness, religion and gurus pitfalls
of psychedelic medicine.
So that's one side of it.
You've kind of already mentioned that these terms can be a little bit misused or, or used
in a variety of ways that they can be confusing.
But in a specific way, as much as we can be specific about these things about the actual
heart problem of consciousness or understanding what is consciousness, this weird thing that
it feels like, it feels like something to experience things have psychedelics giving
you some kind of insight on what is consciousness.
You've mentioned that it feels like psychedelics allows you to kind of dismantle your sense
of self, like step outside of yourself.
That feels like somehow playing with this mechanism of consciousness.
And if it is in fact playing with a mechanism of consciousness using just a few chemicals,
it feels like we're very much in the neighborhood of being able to maybe understand the actual
biological mechanisms of how consciousness can emerge from the brain.
So yeah, there's, there's a bunch there, I think.
My preface is that I certainly have opinions that are outside, that I can say, here are
my best speculations as a, as just a person and an armchair philosopher.
And it's that philosophy is certainly not my, my training and my expertise.
So I have thoughts there, but that, that I recognize are completely in the realm of speculation
that are like things that I would love to wrap empirical science around, but that are,
you know, there's no data and getting to the hard problem, like no conceivable way, even
though I'm, I'm very open, like I'm hoping that, that problem can be cracked.
And I do, I, as an armchair philosopher, I do think that is a problem.
I don't think it can be dismissed as some people argue it's not even really a problem.
It strikes me that, that explaining just the existence of phenomenal consciousness is a
problem.
So anyway, I, I very much had to keep that divide in mind when I talk about these things,
what we can really say about what we've learned through science, including by psychedelics
versus like what I can speculate on in terms of, you know, the nature of reality and consciousness.
But in terms of by and large, skeptically, I have to say psychedelics have not really
taught us anything about the nature of consciousness and hopeful that they will, they, they have
been used around certain, I don't even know if features is the right term, but things
that are called consciousness.
So consciousness can refer to not only just phenomenal consciousness, which is like,
you know, the, the, the source of the hard problem and what it is to be like Nagel's
description, but the sense of self or so, which can be sort of like the, the experiential
self moment to moment, or it can be like the narrative self, the string together of story.
So those are things that I think can be and a little bit's been done with, with psychedelics
regarding that, but I, I think there's far more potential like, but so like one story
that unfolded is that psychedelics acutely have an effects on the default mode network,
a certain, a pattern of activation amongst a subset of brain areas that is associated
with self referential processing seems to be more active, more communication between
these areas like the posterior, cingulate cortex and the medial prefrontal cortex,
for example, being parts of this that are, and others that are tied with sort of thinking
about yourself, remembering yourself in the past, projecting yourself into the future.
And so that it's an interesting story emerge when, when it was found that when psilocybin
is on board, you know, in the person's system, that there's a deep, there's less communication
amongst these, these areas. So with resting state FMRI imaging, that there's, there's
less synchronization or presumably communication between these areas. And so I think it was,
it has been overstated into, ah, we see this is like, this is the dissolving of the ego.
This is, the story made a whole lot of sense, but there's several, I think that story is
really being challenged. Like one, we see increasing number of drugs that are, that,
that decouple that network, including ones like that aren't psychedelic. So this may
just be a property, frankly, of being like, you know, screwed up, you know, like, you
know, being out of your head, being like, like, you know, anytime you mess with a perception
system, maybe it screws up some, some, just our ability to just function in the, the holistically
like we do in order, yeah, for the brain to perceive stuff, to be able to map it to memory,
to connect things together, the, the, the whole recurrent mechanism that, that could
just be messed with, with drugs. Right. And it couldn't, I'm speculating, it could
be tied to more if you had to download into the language, everyday language, like not
feeling like yourself. Like, so whether that be like really drunk, or really hopped up
on amphetamine, or, you know, on, like we found it like decoupling of the default mode
network on Salvin or an A, which is a smokable psychedelic, which is a non classic psychedelic,
but another one where like DMT, where people are often talking to entities and that type
of thing, that was a really fun study to run. But nonetheless, most people say it's not
a classic psychedelic and doesn't have some, some, some of those phenomenal features that
people report from classic psychedelics and not sort of the clear sort of ego loss type,
not at least not in the way that people report it with classic psychedelics. So you get it
with all these different drugs. And so, and then you also see just broad, broad changes
in network activity with other networks. And so I think that story took off a little
too soon, although, so I think in the story that the DMN, the default mode network relating
to the self, and I know some neuroscientists, it drives them crazy if you say that it's
the ego. But self referential processing, if you go that far, like, that was already
known before psychedelics. Psychedelics didn't really contribute to that, the idea
that this type of brain network activity was related to a sense of self. But it is absolutely
striking that psychedelics that people report with pretty high reliability, these unity
experiences that where people subjectively like, like they report losing or getting like
the boundaries of the however you want to say it, like, like these, these unity experiences,
I think we can do a lot with that in terms of figuring out the nature of the sense of
self. Now, I don't think that's the same as the hard problem or, or the existence of
phenomenal consciousness, because you can build an AI system, and you correct me if I'm wrong,
that like, will pass a turing test in terms of demonstrating the qualities of like a sense
of self, it will talk as if there's a self, and there's probably a certain like algorithm
or whatever, like computational like, you know, scaling up of computations that results
in somehow. And I think this is the argument with, with humans, with some have speculated
this, why do we have this illusion of the self that's, that's evolved that, and we might
find this with AI that like, it works, you know, having a sense of self, or in that state
at wrong incorrectly, like, acting as if there is a, an agent at play and damage behaviorally
acting like, you know, there is a, there is a self that might kind of work. And so you
can program a computer or a robot to basically demonstrate, have an algorithm like that and
demonstrate that type of behavior. And I think that's completely silent on whether there's
an actual experience inside there.
I've been struggling to find the right words and how I feel about that whole thing. But
because I've said it poorly before, I've before said that there's no difference between the
appearance and the actual existence of consciousness or intelligence or any of that. What I really
mean is the, the more the appearance starts to be look like the thing, the more there's
this area where it's like, I don't think I don't, our whole idea of what is real and
what is just an illusion is not the right way to think about it. So the whole idea is like,
if you create a system that looks like it's having fun, the more it's realistically able
to portray itself as having fun, like there's a certain gray area at which it's the system
is having fun. And say with intelligence, same with consciousness, and we humans want
to simplify, like it feels like the way we simplified the existence and the illusion
of something is missing the whole truth of the nature of reality, which we're not yet
able to understand. Like it's the 1% we only understand 1% currently. So we don't have
the right physics to talk about things. We don't have the right science to talk about
things. But to me, like the faking it and actually being true is the difference is much
smaller than when humans would like to imagine. That's my intuition. But philosophers hate
that because, and guess what? It's philosophers. What have you actually built? So like to me
is that's the difference in philosophy and engineering. It feels like if we push the
creation, the engineering, like fake it until you make it all the way, which is like fake
consciousness until you realize holy crap, this thing is conscious, fake intelligence
until you realize holy crap, this intelligence. And from the, the my curiosity was psychedelics
and just neurobiology, neuroscience is like, it feels I'm, I love the armchair. I love
sitting in that armchair because it feels like at a certain point you're going to think
about this problem and there's going to be an aha moment. Like that's what the armchair
does. Sometimes science prevents you from really thinking, wait, like it's really simple.
There's something really simple. Like there's some, there could be some dance of chemicals
that we're totally unaware of, not from, not from aspects of like which chemicals to combine
with which biological architectures, but more like we were thinking of it completely wrong
that just out of the blue, like maybe the human mind is just like a radio that tunes
into some other medium where consciousness actually exists. Like those weird sort of
hypothetical, like maybe we're just thinking about the human mind totally wrong. Maybe
there's no such thing as individual intelligence. Maybe it is all collective intelligence between
humans. Like maybe the intelligence is possessed in the communication of language between minds
and then in fact consciousness is a property of that language versus a property of the
individual minds. And somehow the neurotransmitters will be able to connect to that so then AI systems
can join that common collective intelligence, that common language. You know, like just
thinking completely outside of the box. I just said a much crazy thing. I don't know, but
thinking outside the box and there's something about subtle manipulation of the chemicals
of the brain which feels like the best or one of the great chances of the scientific
process leading us to an actual understanding of the hard problem.
So I am very hopeful that and so I, I mean, I'm a radical empiricist, which I'm very strong
with with that. Like that's what, you know, so, you know, science isn't about ultimately
being a materialist. It's like, it's about being an empiricist in my view. And so for
example, I'm very fascinated by the so called sci phenomenon, you know, like stuff that
people just kind of reject out of hand. You know, I kind of orient towards that stuff
with an idea of, you know, hey, look, you know, what we consider like anything exists
is natural. And so, but the boundary of what we observe in nature, like what we recognize
as in nature moves, like what we do today and what we know today would only be described
as magic 500 years ago or even 100 years ago, some of it. So there will surely be things
that like you explained these phenomena that just sound like completely soup, they're supernatural
now where there may be for some of it, like some of it might turn out to be a complete
bunk and some of it might turn out to be it's just another layer of nature, whether we're
talking about multiple dimensions that are invoked or something we don't even have the
language towards. And what you're saying about the moving together of the model and
the real thing of consciousness, like, I'm very sympathetic to that. So that's that part
of like on the armshare side where I want to be clear, I can't say this as a scientist,
but just in terms of speculating, I find myself attracted to these more of the sort of the
panpsychism ideas. And that kind of makes sense to me. I don't know if that's what
you meant there, but seemed like related the sense that ultimately, if you were completely
modeling, unless you dismiss the idea that there is a phenomenal consciousness, which
I think is hard given that I seem like I have one that's really all I know, but if that's
so compelling, I can't just dismiss that. If you take that as a given, then the only
way for the model and the real thing to merge is if there is something baked into the nature
of reality sort of like in the history of like they're certain just like fundamental
forces or fundamental like in that and that's been useful for us. And sometimes we find
out that that's pointing towards something else or sometimes it's still seems like it's
a fundamental and sometimes it's a placeholder for somewhere forget, but there's something
like this is just a given. This is just and sometimes I'm like gravity seems like a very
good placeholder than there's something better that comes to replace it. So I kind of think
about like consciousness and I didn't I kind of had this inclination for I knew there was
a term for it, Rosalian monism, the idea that which is a form of pain again, I'm not I'm
an armchair philosopher, not a very good one, broadly panpsychism, by the way, is the idea
that sort of consciousness permeates all matter in or it's a fundamental part of physics of
the universe kind of thing. So right, this is the and there's a lot of different flavors
of it as you're as you're alluding to. And something that struck me as like consistent
with some just, you know, inclinations of mind just total speculation is this idea of
everything we know in science and with most of the stuff we think of physics, you know,
really describes it's all interactions. It's not the thing itself. Like there's a there
is something to this. And this sounds very new agey, which is why it's very difficult
and I had a high bullshit like meter and everything. But like an isness, I mean, I think about
like Huxley all this Huxley with his mescaline experience and doors of procession, like there's
an isness there and you know, Alan Watson, like there is a nature of being again, very
new agey sounding, but maybe there is something to in and when we say consciousness, we think
of like this human experience. But maybe that's just that's so processed and so that's so
far so derivative of this kind of basic thing that we wouldn't even recognize the basic
thing. But the basic thing might just be this is not about the interaction between particles.
This is what it is like to exist as a particle. And maybe it's not even particles, maybe it's
like space time itself. I mean, again, totally in the speculation and something out of space
time. So it's funny because we don't have this neither the science nor the proper language
to talk about it. All we have is kind of little intuitions about there might be something
in that direction of the darkness, right to pursue. And that that in that sense, I find
panpsychism interesting in that like, it does feel like there's something fundamental here,
the consciousness is not just like, okay, so the flip side consciousness could be just
a very basic and trivial symptom, like like a little hack of nature that's useful for
like survival of an organism. It's not something fundamental. It's just this very basic, boring
chemical thing that somehow has convinced us humans because we're very human centric
for very self centric, that this is somehow really important, but it's actually pretty
obvious. But or it could be something really fundamental to the nature of the universe.
So both of those are to me pretty compelling. And I think eventually scientifically testable,
it is so frustrating that it's hard to design scientific experiment currently. But I think
it's that's how noble prizes are won is nobody did it until they do it.
The reason I lean towards and again, armchair spec, if I had to bet like $1,000 on which
one of these ultimately be proved, I would, I would head, you know, would lean towards
and put my bets on, on something like panpsychism rather than the, the emergence of phenomenal
con consciousness through complexity or computational complexity, because although certainly what
that, if there is some underlying fundamental consciousness, it's clearly being processed
and you know, in this way, you go through computation in terms of resulting in our experience
and the experience presumably of other animals. But the reason I would bet on panpsychism
is to me, Occam's razor, it just in terms of truly the hard problem, like this at some
point you have an inside looking out and even looking refers to vision and it doesn't, that's
just an exit, you know, but just there's an inside experiencing something at some point
of complexity. All of a sudden, you know, you start from this objective universe and
all we know about is interactions between things and things happen. And at this certain
level of complexity, magically, there's an inside that to me doesn't pass Occam's razor
as easily as maybe there is a fundamental property of the universe of, you know, there's
both subjective and objective, there's both interactions amongst things and there is the
thing itself. Yes.
But yeah.
So I'm of two minds. I agree with you totally on half of my mind and the other half is I've
seen looking at cellular automata a lot, which is complete, it sure does seem that we don't
understand anything about complexity, like the emergence, just the property. In fact,
that could be a fundamental property of reality is something within the emergence from simple
things interacting somehow miraculous things happen. And like that, I don't understand
that, that could be that could be fundamental that like something about the layers of abstraction,
like layers of reality, like really small things interacting and then on another layer
emerges actual complicated behavior, even on the underlying things, super simple. Like
that process, we don't really don't understand either. And that could be bigger than any
of the things we're talking about. That's the basic force behind everything that's
happening in the universe is from simple things, complex phenomena can happen.
And the thing that gives me pause is that I'm concerned about a threshold there. Like,
how is it likely that now there may be and there may be some qualitative shift that in
the realm of like, we don't even we don't even understand complexity yet, like you're
saying, like, so maybe there is. But I do think like, if it if it is a result of the
complexity, well, you know, just having helium versus hydrogen is a form of complexity, having
the existence of stars versus clouds of gases of complexity, the the the entire universe
has been this increasing complexity. And so that kind of brings me back to then the other
of like, okay, if there's, if it's about complexity, then we should then it exists at a certain
level in these simple systems like a star, or, or, you know, they all have a kind of
panpsychism, that's right. But we humans, the qualitative shift, we might have evolved
to appreciate certain kinds of thresholds, right? Yeah, I do think it's likely that this
idea that whether or not there's an inner experience, which is phenomenal, it's the
hard problem that acting like an agent, like having an algorithm that basically like operates
as if there is an agent, that's clearly a thing that I think has worked. And that there
is a whole lot to figure out there that that and I think psychedelics will be extremely
helpful in figuring more out about that, because they do seem to a lot of times eliminate
that, or whatever, radically shift that sense of, of self.
Let me ask the craziest question. Indulge me for a second. Oh, this is a joke.
What we've been talking about, like, okay, no, all of this is a sign. All of that, despite
the caveats about armchair, I think is within the reach of science. Let me, let me ask one
that's kind of also within the reach of science, but as Joe likes to say, it's entirely possible,
right? Is it possible that with these DMT trips, when you meet entities, is it possible
that these entities are extraterrestrial life forms? Like our understanding of little
green men with aliens that show up is totally off. I often think about this, like what would
actual extraterrestrial intelligence look like? And my sense is it will look like very
different from anything we can even begin to comprehend.
And how would it communicate? And how would it communicate?
Would it be necessarily spaceships? Would there still a travel or could it be communicating
through chemicals, through, if there's the panpsychism situation, if there's something
not if? I almost for sure know we don't understand, you know, a lot about the function of our
mind in connection to the fabric of the physics in the universe. A lot of people seem to think
we have theoretical physics pretty figured out. I have my doubts, because I'm pretty
sure it always feels like we have everything figured out until we don't.
Right. I mean, there's no grand unifying theory yet, right? I mean, that's been widely recognized.
We could be missing out, like the concept of the universe just can be completely off.
Like how many other universes are there? All those kinds of things. I mean, just the basic
nature of information, the time, all those things. Yeah, whether that's just like a thing
we assign value to or whether it's fundamental or not, that's the whole chunk. I can talk
to the chunker forever about whether time is emergent or fundamental to the reality.
But is it possible that the entities we meet are actual alien life forms? Do you ever think
about that?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, I do. To some degree, I laid my cards out by identifying as a radical
empiricist. So the answer, is it possible? And I think ultimately, if you're a good
scientist, you got to say, now that's at the extremes, it's a yes. And it might get more
interesting when you're asked to guess about the probability of that. Is that a one in
a million, one in a trillion, one in more than the number of atoms in the universe probability?
And as an empiricist, what is a good testable? How would you know the answer to that question?
Well, how would you be able to validate it?
Well, can you get some information that's verifiable, like information about some other
planet or some aspect? And gosh, it would be an interesting range, but what range of discovery
that we can anticipate we're going to know within a few years, next 5, 10, 20 years,
and seeing if you can get that information now and then over time, it might be verified.
The type of thing like part of Einstein's work was ultimately verified not until decades
and decades later, at least certain aspects through empirical observations.
But it's also possible that the alien beings have a very different value system and perception
of the world where all of this little capitalistic improvements that we're all after, like predicting
the concept of predicting the future to is totally useless to other life forms that perhaps
think in a much different way, maybe a more transcendent way, I don't know.
So they wouldn't even sign the consent form to be a participant in our experiment.
That would not. And they wouldn't understand the nature of these experiments. I mean,
maybe it's purely in the realm of the consciousness thing that we talked about. So communicating
in a way that is totally different than the kinds of communication that we think of as
out on Earth. What's the purpose of communication for us? For us humans, the purpose of communication
is sharing ideas, it feels like, like converging. It's the Dawkins, like memes. It's like we're
sharing ideas in order to figure out how to collaborate together to get food into our
systems and procreate and then murder everybody in the neighboring tribe because they'll steal
our food. We are all about sharing ideas. Maybe it's possible to have another alien
life form that's more about sharing experiences. It's less about ideas, I don't know.
And maybe that'll be us in a few years. How could it not? Instead of explaining something
laboriously to you, like having people to describe the ineffable psychedelic experience,
if we could record that and then get the neural link of 50 years from now, like, oh, just plug
this into your...
To just transfer in the experiences?
Yeah. It's like, oh, now you feel what it's like. In one sense, how could we not go there?
And then you get into the realm, especially when you throw time into it, are the aliens
us in the future? Or even like a transcendental temporal, like the us beyond time? You get
into this realm and there's a lot of possibilities. Yeah. But I think there's one psychedelic
researcher who did high dose DMT research in the 90s who speculated that in there was
a lot of alien encounter experiences, like maybe these are entities from some other dimension.
He labeled it as speculation, but...
Do you remember the name?
Oh, Rick Strossman.
Yeah, the DMT work. He labeled it as speculation, but I think that, yeah, I think it's a bit
of... Yeah, I think we'd be wise to kind of... It's always that balance between being empirically
grounded and skeptical, but also not being... And I think in science, well, often we are
too closed, which relates to like you're talking about Elon. Like in academia, it's like often...
I think you're punished for thinking or even talking about 20 years from now because it's
just so far removed from your next grant or for your next paper that it's easy pickings.
And that you're not allowed to speculate, so...
I'm a huge fan of... I think the best way to me at least to practice science or to practice
good engineering is to do two things and just bounce off... Spend most of the time doing
the rigor of the day to day of what can be accomplished. Now, in the engineering space
or in the science, what can you construct an experiment around? Do like that. The usual
rigor of the scientific process, but then every once in a while on a regular basis to
step outside and talk about aliens and consciousness. And we just walk along the line of things
that are outside the reach of science currently. Free will, the illusion or the perception
of the experience of free will of anything, just the entirety of it being able to travel
in time through warm holes. It's like it's really useful to do that, especially as a
scientist. Like if that's all you do, you go into a land where you're not actually able
to think rigorously. There's something, at least to me, that if you just hop back and
forth, you're able to, I think, do exactly the kind of injection of out of the box thinking
to your regular day to day science that will ultimately lead to breakthroughs. But you
have to be the good scientist most of the time.
And that's consistent with what I think the great scientists of history. Like in most
of the history, the greats, the Newtons and Einstein's, I mean, there was less of it,
and this change, I think, is time marched on, but less of a separation between those
realms. It's like there's the inclination now for it as a scientist. And this is like,
this is science, this is my work, and then this is like my inclination to say, oh, Lex,
don't take me too seriously because this is my armchair. I'm not speaking as a scientist.
I'm bending over backwards to say, to divide that self, and maybe there's been less of,
there's been that evolution. And the greats didn't see that. I mean, and you go back in
time, that obviously connects to then religion, especially if that is the predominant world
or Newton. How much time did he spend trying to decode the Bible and whatnot? Maybe that
was a dead end. But it's like, if you really believe in that, in that particular religion,
and you're this mastermind, and you're trying to figure things out, it's not like, oh, this
is what my job description is, and this is what the grant wants. It's like, no, I've
got this limited time on the planet. I'm going to figure out as much stuff as possible. Nothing
is off the table, and you're just putting it all together. So this is kind of this trajectory
is really related to the siloing in science. Again, related to my like, oh, I'm not a philosopher,
whether you consider science or not, not empirical science, but like going to these different
disciplines, like the greats didn't observe the boundaries didn't exist, they didn't
observe them.
Yeah. So speaking of the finiteness of our existence in this world, so on the front
of psychedelics and teaching you lessons as a researcher, as a human being, what have
you learned about death, about mortality, about the finiteness of our existence? Are
you yourself afraid of death? And how has your view, do you ponder it? And has your
view of your mortality changed with the research you've done?
Yeah. Yeah. So I do ponder it and...
Are you afraid of death?
Probably on a daily basis I ponder it. I would, I'd have to pick it apart more and say, yeah,
I am afraid of dying, like the process of dying. I'm not afraid of being dead. I mean,
I'm not afraid of, I think it was Penn Gillette that said, and he may have gotten it from
someone else, but like, I'm not afraid of the year 1862 before I existed. I'm not afraid
of the year 2262 after I'm gone, like, it's going to be fine. But yeah, dying, like, I'd
be lying if I said I wasn't afraid of dying. And so there's both, like, the process of
dying, like, yeah, it's usually not good. It'd be nice if it was after many, many years
and just sort of, you know, I'd rather not fall, you know, die in my sleep. I'd rather
kind of be conscious, but sort of just fade out with old age maybe. But like, you know,
just being in an accident and like, horrible diseases, I've seen enough loved ones, it's
like, yeah, this is not good. This is enough to be, you know, I'd like to say that I'm
peaceful and sort of balanced enough that I'm not concerned at all. But no, like, yeah,
I'm afraid of dying. But I'm also concerned about, I think about family, like, I'm really,
I'm afraid or at least, you know, concerned about, like, not being there, like with a
three year old, not being there, not being there for him and my wife and my mom the rest
of her life. I'm concerned about not, I'm concerned more about, like, the harm that
it would cause if I left prematurely. And then kind of even bigger along the lines of some
of the stuff that Ford think we've been talking about, I think maybe way too much about just
like, and I'll never know the answer. So even if I lived 120, like, but like, I want to
know as much as I can, but like, how is this going to work out, like, as humans? Are we
in a big one? I think it's, are we going to, and I don't think, unfortunately, I'm going
to learn it in my lifetime, even if I live to a ripe old age, but well, I don't know.
Is this going to work out?
Like, are we going to escape the planet? I think that's one of the biggies. Like, are
we going to like, the survival of the speed, like, I think the next, like the time we're
in now, it's like with the nuclear weapons, with pandemics, and with, I mean, we're going
to get to the point where anyone can, can build a hydrogen bomb, like, you know, it's
like, you just like the, or engineer, like the, you know, something that's a million
times worse than COVID and then just spread it. It's like, we're getting to this period
of, and then not, you know, not to mention climate change, you know, it's like, although
I think that's not, there's probably going to be surviving humans with that regard,
you know, but it could be really bad. But these existential threats, I think the only
real guarantee that we're going to get another, you name it, 1000 million, whatever years
is like diversity, diversifier portfolio, get off the planet, you know, don't leave
this one, hopefully we keep, you know, but like, and I, you know, it's like either we're
going to get snuffed out, like really quickly, or we're going to like, if we, if we reach
that point, and it's going to be over the next like 100, 200 years, like, like, we're
probably going to survive like, like until like, I mean, you know, like our son, like
even beyond that, like, like, we're probably going to be talking about millions and millions
of years. It's like, and we're, we're, I don't know, in terms of the planet, 4 billion years
into this. And depending on how you count our species, you know, we're, you know, we're
millions of years into this. And it's like, it's just like the point of the rear relay
race where we can really screw up.
So that would make you feel pretty good when you're on your death bed at 120 years old.
And there's something hopeful about, there's a colony starting up on Mars. And it's like,
yeah, Titan, like whatever, you know, like, yeah, like that we have these colonies out
there that would tell me like, yeah, then at least we'd be good until like the, you know,
hopefully probably until the, the, the sun goes red giant, you know what I mean?
Yeah. Rather than, oh, like 20 years from now, when there's some, someone with their
finger on the nuclear button that just, you know, misperceives, you know, the radar, you
know, like the signal they think Russia's attacking or really not, or China. And like,
that's probably how a nuclear accident war is going to start rather than, you know, or
the, like I said, these other horrible things.
Does it not make you sad that you won't be there if we are successful at proliferating
throughout the observable universe that you won't be there to experience any of it?
Yeah.
It's ego death, right? It's the death because you're still going to die and still going to
be over.
Right.
That's, you know, Ernest Becker and those folks really emphasize the terror of death
that if we're honest, we'll discover if we search within ourselves, which is like, this
thing is going to be over. Most of our existence is based on the illusion that it's going to
go forever. And when you sort of realize it's actually going to be over, like today, like
I might murder you at the end of this conversation.
And it might be over today or like you go on going home. This might be your last day
on this earth. And it's, I mean, like pondering that, I suppose, I suppose one thing to be
me, I, if I were to push back, it's interesting is you actually, I think you see comfort in
the sadness of how unfortunate it would be for your family to not have you. Because the
really even, even the deeper, yes, but that's the simple fear. Even the deeper terror is
like, like this, this thing doesn't last forever. Like I think, I don't know, they're like if
it's hard to put the right words to it, but it feels like that's not truly acknowledged
by us, by each of us.
Yeah. I think this is the, I mean, getting back to the psychedelics in terms of the people
and our work with cancer patients who we had psilocybin sessions to help them and it did
substantially help them, the vast majority, in terms of dealing with these existential
issues. And I think, you know, it's something we, I could say that I really feel that I've
come along and that both like being with folks who have died that are close to me and then
also that work, I think are the two biggies and sort of like, you know, I think I've come
along and that sort of acceptance of this, like, like it's not going to last any, whether
we're at the personal level or even at the species level, like at some point, all the
stars are going to fade out and it's going to be the realm of which is going to be the
vast majority if it can, unless there's a big crunch, which just apparently doesn't
seem likely, like most of the universe, there's this blink of an eye that's happening right
now that life is even possible, like the era of stars. So it's like, we're going to fade
out at some point, like, you know, and, you know, didn't we get at this level of consciousness
and like, okay, maybe there is life after death, maybe there's maybe times in illusion,
maybe we're like, that part I'm ready for, like, I'm, I'm like, you know, like, that,
that would be really great. And I'm looking, I'm not afraid of that at all. It's like,
even if it's just strange, like if I could push a button to enter that door, I mean,
I'm not going to, you know, die, you know, I can kill myself, but it's like, if I could
take a peek at what that reality is or choose at the end of my life, if I could choose of
entering into a universe where there is an afterlife of something completely unknown
versus one where there's none, I think I'd say, well, let's see what's behind that.
That's a true scientist way of thinking. If there's a door, you're excited about opening
it and going in. Right.
When I am attracted to this idea, like, you know, it's, and I recognize it's easier said
than done to say, I'm okay with not existing. It's like, the real test is like, okay, check
me on my deathbed. You know, it's like, it's, oh, it'll be all right. It's beautiful thing
and the humility of surrendering. And I really hope, and I think I'd probably be more likely
to be in that realm right now than I would like, or check me when I get a terminal cancer
diagnosis. And I really hope I'm more in that realm. But I, I know enough about human nature
to know that like, I don't want to, I can't really speak to that because I haven't been
in that situation. And I think there can be a beauty to that and the transcendence of
like, yeah, and you know, it was, it was beautiful, not just despite all that, but because of
that, because ultimately there's going to be nothing. And because we came from nothing
and we dealt with all this shit, the fact that there was still beauty and truth and
connection, like that, you know, like it just, it's a beautiful thing. But I hope I'm in
that. It's easy to say that now. Like, yeah.
Do you think there's a meaning to this thing we got going on life, existence on earth to
us individuals from a psychedelics researcher perspective or from just a human perspective?
Those merged together for me, because it's, it's just hard. I've been doing this research
for almost 17 years and like, not just the cancer study, but so many times people like,
I remember a session in this, in one of our studies, someone who wasn't getting any treatment
for anything, but one of our healthy normal studies where he was contemplating the, the
suicide of his son. And just these, I mean, just like the most intense human experiences
that you can have in the most vulnerable situations, sometimes like people, like, you know, and
it's just like, you have to have a, I mean, you just feel lucky to be part of that process
that people trust you to let their guards down like that.
Like, I don't know, the meaning, I think the meaning of life is, is, is defined meaning.
And I think, actually, I think I just described it a minute ago, it's like that transcendence
of everything, like the, it's the beauty despite the absolute ugliness, it's the, it's the,
and as a species, and I think more about this, like I think about this a lot, it's the fact
that we are, I mean, we're, we come from filth, I mean, we're, we're, you know, we're animals,
we come from, like, we're all descended from murderers and rapists, like we despite that
background.
We are capable of this, the self sacrifice and the connection and, and, and, and figuring
things out, you know, true science and other forms of truth, you know, seeking and, and
an artwork, just the beauty of, of, of music and, and other forms of art.
It's like the fact that that's possible is the meaning of, of life.
I mean, and ultimately that feels to be creating a more enricher experiences, the, from a Russian
perspective, both the dark, the, you mentioned the cancer diagnosis or losing a child to
suicide or all those dark things is, is still rich experiences and also the, the beautiful
creations, the art, the music, the science, that's also rich experience.
So somehow we're figuring out from just like psychedelics expand our mind to the possibility
of experiences.
Somehow we're able to figure out different ways of society to expand the realm of experiences
and from that we gain meaning somehow.
Right.
And that's part of like this, we're going across different levels here, but like the
idea that so called bad trips or challenging experiences are so common in psychedelic experiences.
It's like, that's a part of that.
Like, yeah, it's tough and most of the important things in life are really, really tough and
scary.
And most of the things like, like the death of a loved one, like it told, like the greatest
learning experiences and things that make you who you are are the horrors.
And you know, it's like, yeah, we try to minimize and we try to avoid them.
But and I don't know, I think we all need to get into the mode of like giving ourselves
a break both personally and society, societally, I mean, I went through like the, the, I think
a lot of people do these days in my twenties, like, oh, the humans are just kind of a disease
on the planet.
And then in terms of our country, in terms of the United States, it's like, oh, we have
all these horrible, you know, sins in our past.
And it's like, I think about that like the, I think about it like my three year olds,
like, yeah, you can construct a story where this is all just hard.
You can look at that stuff and say this is all just horror, you know, where you are.
There's like, there's no logical answer to our, you know, rational answer to say, we're
not a disease on the planet from one lens we are, you know, you know, and like there's
you could just look at humanity as that like nothing but this horrible thing you can look
at any you and you name the system, you know, oh, you know, modern medicine, Western medicine,
you know, the university system and it's like, you can dismiss everything as a, you know,
big font or like, hopefully these vaccines work and then like, yeah, I'd like to, you
know, like, I'm kind of glad the big pharma was a part of that, like, you know, it's like
the United States, you can like point to the horrors, like any other country that's been
around a long time that has these legitimate horrors and kind of dismiss like these beautiful
things like, yeah, we have this like modifiable constitutional republic that just like I still
think is the best thing going, you know, that that as a model system of like how humans
have to figure out how to work together, it's like it's how there's no better system that
I've come across.
Yeah, there's a, if we're willing to look for it, there's a, there's a beautiful court
to a lot of things we've created.
Yeah, this country is a great example of that, but most of the human experience has a has
a beauty to it, even the suffering.
Right.
So the meaning is fine is choosing to focus on that positivity and not forget it.
Beautifully put.
Speaking of experiences, this was one of my favorite experience on this podcast talking
to you today, Matthew, I hope we get a chance to talk again.
I hope to see you on Joe Rogan, the huge honor to talk to you.
Can't wait to read your papers.
Thanks for talking today.
Likewise.
I very much enjoyed it.
Thank you.
Thanks for listening to this conversation with Matthew Johnson and thank you to our sponsors.
Brave, a fast browser that feels like Chrome, but has more privacy preserving features.
Neuro, the maker of functional sugar free gum and mints that I use to give my brain a
quick caffeine boost for Sigmatic, the maker of delicious mushroom coffee and cash app.
The app I use to send money to friends.
Please check out these sponsors in the description to get a discount and to support this podcast.
If you enjoy this thing, subscribe on YouTube, review it with five stars and apple podcast,
follow on Spotify, support on Patreon or connect with me on Twitter at Lex Friedman.
And now let me leave you with some words from Terence McKenna.
Nature loves courage.
You make the commitment and nature will respond to that commitment by removing impossible
obstacles.
Dream the impossible dream and the world will not grind you under.
It will lift you up.
This is the trick.
This is what all these teachers and philosophers who really counted, who really touched the
alchemical gold.
This is what they understood.
This is the shamanic dance in the waterfall.
This is how magic is done by hurling yourself into the abyss and discovering it's a feather
bed.
Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.